FEDERATED OPTIMIZATION IN HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS
Tian Li 1 Anit Kumar Sahu 2 Manzil Zaheer 3 Maziar Sanjabi 4 Ameet Talwalkar 1 5 Virginia Smith 1
ABSTRACT
Federated Learning is a distributed learning paradigm with two key challenges that differentiate it from traditional
distributed optimization: (1) signiﬁcant variability in terms of the systems characteristics on each device in
the network (systems heterogeneity), and (2) non-identically distributed data across the network (statistical
heterogeneity). In this work, we introduce a framework, FedProx, to tackle heterogeneity in federated networks.
FedProx can be viewed as a generalization and re-parametrization of FedAvg, the current state-of-the-art
method for federated learning. While this re-parameterization makes only minor modiﬁcations to the method
itself, these modiﬁcations have important ramiﬁcations both in theory and in practice. Theoretically, we provide
convergence guarantees for our framework when learning over data from non-identical distributions (statistical
heterogeneity), and while adhering to device-level systems constraints by allowing each participating device to
perform a variable amount of work (systems heterogeneity). Practically, we demonstrate that FedProx allows
for more robust convergence than FedAvg across a suite of realistic federated datasets. In particular, in highly
heterogeneous settings, FedProx demonstrates signiﬁcantly more stable and accurate convergence behavior
relative to FedAvg—improving absolute test accuracy by 22% on average.
1
INTRODUCTION
Federated learning has emerged as an attractive paradigm
for distributing training of machine learning models in net-
works of remote devices. While there is a wealth of work
on distributed optimization in the context of machine learn-
ing, two key challenges distinguish federated learning from
traditional distributed optimization: high degrees of systems
and statistical heterogeneity1 (McMahan et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2019).
In an attempt to handle heterogeneity and tackle high com-
munication costs, optimization methods that allow for lo-
cal updating and low participation are a popular approach
for federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017; Smith et al.,
2017). In particular, FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) is
an iterative method that has emerged as the de facto opti-
mization method in the federated setting. At each iteration,
FedAvg ﬁrst locally performs E epochs of stochastic gra-
1Carnegie Mellon University 2Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence 3Goolge Research 4Facebook AI 5Determined AI. Corre-
spondence to: Tian Li <tianli@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 3 rd MLSys Conference, Austin, TX, USA,
2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1Privacy is a third key challenge in the federated setting. While
not the focus of this work, standard privacy-preserving approaches
such as differential privacy and secure multiparty communication
can naturally be combined with the methods proposed herein—
particularly since our framework proposes only lightweight algo-
rithmic modiﬁcations to prior work.
dient descent (SGD) on K devices—where E is a small
constant and K is a small fraction of the total devices in
the network. The devices then communicate their model
updates to a central server, where they are averaged.
While FedAvg has demonstrated empirical success in het-
erogeneous settings, it does not fully address the underlying
challenges associated with heterogeneity. In the context
of systems heterogeneity, FedAvg does not allow partici-
pating devices to perform variable amounts of local work
based on their underlying systems constraints; instead it
is common to simply drop devices that fail to compute E
epochs within a speciﬁed time window (Bonawitz et al.,
2019). From a statistical perspective, FedAvg has been
shown to diverge empirically in settings where the data is
non-identically distributed across devices (e.g., McMahan
et al., 2017, Sec 3). Unfortunately, FedAvg is difﬁcult to
analyze theoretically in such realistic scenarios and thus
lacks convergence guarantees to characterize its behavior
(see Section 2 for additional details).
In this work, we propose FedProx, a federated optimiza-
tion algorithm that addresses the challenges of heterogene-
ity both theoretically and empirically. A key insight we
have in developing FedProx is that an interplay exists
between systems and statistical heterogeneity in federated
learning. Indeed, both dropping stragglers (as in FedAvg)
or naively incorporating partial information from stragglers
(as in FedProx with the proximal term set to 0) implicitly
increases statistical heterogeneity and can adversely impact
arXiv:1812.06127v5  [cs.LG]  21 Apr 2020
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
convergence behavior. To mitigate this issue, we propose
adding a proximal term to the objective that helps to improve
the stability of the method. This term provides a principled
way for the server to account for heterogeneity associated
with partial information. Theoretically, these modiﬁcations
allow us to provide convergence guarantees for our method
and to analyze the effect of heterogeneity. Empirically, we
demonstrate that the modiﬁcations improve the stability
and overall accuracy of federated learning in heterogeneous
networks—improving the absolute testing accuracy by 22%
on average in highly heterogeneous settings.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion 2, we provide background on federated learning and
an overview of related work. We then present our proposed
framework, FedProx, in Section 3, and derive convergence
guarantees for the framework accounting for both statistical
and systems heterogeneity in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5,
we provide a thorough empirical evaluation of FedProx on
a suite of synthetic and real-world federated datasets. Our
empirical results help to illustrate and validate our theoreti-
cal analysis, and demonstrate the practical improvements of
FedProx over FedAvg in heterogeneous networks.
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Large-scale machine learning, particularly in data center
settings, has motivated the development of numerous dis-
tributed optimization methods in the past decade (see, e.g.,
Boyd et al., 2010; Dekel et al., 2012; Dean et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014a; Shamir et al., 2014;
Reddi et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2015; Richt´arik & Tak´aˇc,
2016; Smith et al., 2018). However, as computing substrates
such as phones, sensors, and wearable devices grow both in
power and in popularity, it is increasingly attractive to learn
statistical models locally in networks of distributed devices,
in contrast to moving the data to the data center. This prob-
lem, known as federated learning, requires tackling novel
challenges with privacy, heterogeneous data and devices,
and massively distributed networks (Li et al., 2019).
Recent optimization methods have been proposed that are
tailored to the speciﬁc challenges in the federated setting.
These methods have shown signiﬁcant improvements over
traditional distributed approaches such as ADMM (Boyd
et al., 2010) or mini-batch methods (Dekel et al., 2012) by
allowing both for inexact local updating in order to balance
communication vs. computation in large networks, and for
a small subset of devices to be active at any communication
round (McMahan et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2017). For exam-
ple, Smith et al. (2017) propose a communication-efﬁcient
primal-dual optimization method that learns separate but
related models for each device through a multi-task learning
framework. Despite the theoretical guarantees and practical
efﬁciency of the proposed method, such an approach is not
generalizable to non-convex problems, e.g., deep learning,
where strong duality is no longer guaranteed. In the non-
convex setting, Federated Averaging (FedAvg), a heuristic
method based on averaging local Stochastic Gradient De-
scent (SGD) updates in the primal, has instead been shown
to work well empirically (McMahan et al., 2017).
Unfortunately, FedAvg is quite challenging to analyze due
to its local updating scheme, the fact that few devices are
active at each round, and the issue that data is frequently
distributed in a heterogeneous nature in the network. In par-
ticular, as each device generates its own local data, statistical
heterogeneity is common with data being non-identically
distributed between devices. Several works have made steps
towards analyzing FedAvg in simpler, non-federated set-
tings. For instance, parallel SGD and related variants (Zhang
et al., 2015; Shamir et al., 2014; Reddi et al., 2016; Zhou &
Cong, 2018; Stich, 2019; Wang & Joshi, 2018; Woodworth
et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2020), which make local updates
similar to FedAvg, have been studied in the IID setting.
However, the results rely on the premise that each local
solver is a copy of the same stochastic process (due to the
IID assumption). This line of reasoning does not apply to
the heterogeneous setting.
Although some recent works (Yu et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2019; Hao et al., 2019; Jiang & Agrawal, 2018) have ex-
plored convergence guarantees in statistically heterogeneous
settings, they make the limiting assumption that all devices
participate in each round of communication, which is often
infeasible in realistic federated networks (McMahan et al.,
2017). Further, they rely on speciﬁc solvers to be used on
each device (either SGD or GD), as compared to the solver-
agnostic framework proposed herein, and add additional
assumptions of convexity (Wang et al., 2019) or uniformly
bounded gradients (Yu et al., 2018) to their analyses. There
are also heuristic approaches that aim to tackle statistical
heterogeneity by sharing the local device data or server-side
proxy data (Jeong et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2018). However, these methods may be unrealistic: in
addition to imposing burdens on network bandwidth, send-
ing local data to the server (Jeong et al., 2018) violates the
key privacy assumption of federated learning, and sending
globally-shared proxy data to all devices (Zhao et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2018) requires effort to carefully generate or
collect such auxiliary data.
Beyond statistical heterogeneity, systems heterogeneity is
also a critical concern in federated networks. The storage,
computational, and communication capabilities of each de-
vice in federated networks may differ due to variability in
hardware (CPU, memory), network connectivity (3G, 4G,
5G, wiﬁ), and power (battery level). These system-level
characteristics dramatically exacerbate challenges such as
straggler mitigation and fault tolerance. One strategy used
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
in practice is to ignore the more constrained devices failing
to complete a certain amount of training (Bonawitz et al.,
2019). However (as we demonstrate in Section 5), this can
have negative effects on convergence as it limits the number
of effective devices contributing to training, and may induce
bias in the device sampling procedure if the dropped devices
have speciﬁc data characteristics.
In this work, inspired by FedAvg, we explore a broader
framework, FedProx, that is capable of handling hetero-
geneous federated environments while maintaining similar
privacy and computational beneﬁts. We analyze the con-
vergence behavior of the framework through a statistical
dissimilarity characterization between local functions, while
also taking into account practical systems constraints. Our
dissimilarity characterization is inspired by the randomized
Kaczmarz method for solving linear system of equations
(Kaczmarz, 1993; Strohmer & Vershynin, 2009), a similar
assumption of which has been used to analyze variants of
SGD in other settings (see, e.g., Schmidt & Roux, 2013;
Vaswani et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2018). Our proposed frame-
work provides improved robustness and stability for opti-
mization in heterogeneous federated networks.
Finally, in terms of related work, we note that two aspects
of our proposed work—the proximal term in FedProx and
the bounded dissimilarity assumption used in our analysis—
have been previously studied in the optimization literature,
though often with very different motivations and in non-
federated settings. For completeness, we provide a further
discussion in Appendix B on this background work.
3
FEDERATED OPTIMIZATION: METHODS
In this section, we introduce the key ingredients behind
recent methods for federated learning, including FedAvg,
and then outline our proposed framework, FedProx.
Federated learning methods (e.g., McMahan et al., 2017;
Smith et al., 2017) are designed to handle multiple devices
collecting data and a central server coordinating the global
learning objective across the network. In particular, the aim
is to minimize:
min
w
f(w) =
N
X
k=1
pkFk(w) = Ek[Fk(w)],
(1)
where N is the number of devices, pk ≥0, and P
k pk=1.
In general, the local objectives measure the local empiri-
cal risk over possibly differing data distributions Dk, i.e.,
Fk(w) := Exk∼Dk[fk(w; xk)], with nk samples available
at each device k. Hence, we can set pk= nk
n , where n=
P
k nk is the total number of data points. In this work, we
consider Fk(w) to be possibly non-convex.
To reduce communication, a common technique in feder-
ated optimization is that on each device, a local objective
function based on the device’s data is used as a surrogate
for the global objective function. At each outer iteration,
a subset of the devices are selected and local solvers are
used to optimize the local objective functions on each of
the selected devices. The devices then communicate their
local model updates to the central server, which aggregates
them and updates the global model accordingly. The key to
allowing ﬂexible performance in this scenario is that each of
the local objectives can be solved inexactly. This allows the
amount of local computation vs. communication to be tuned
based on the number of local iterations that are performed
(with additional local iterations corresponding to more exact
local solutions). We introduce this notion formally below,
as it will be utilized throughout the paper.
Deﬁnition
1
(γ-inexact
solution).
For
a
function
h(w; w0) = F(w) + µ
2 ∥w −w0∥2, and γ
∈[0, 1],
we say w∗is a γ-inexact solution of minw h(w; w0)
if
∥∇h(w∗; w0)∥
≤
γ∥∇h(w0; w0)∥,
where
∇h(w; w0)
=
∇F(w) + µ(w −w0).
Note that a
smaller γ corresponds to higher accuracy.
We use γ-inexactness in our analysis (Section 4) to mea-
sure the amount of local computation from the local solver
at each round. As discussed earlier, different devices are
likely to make different progress towards solving the local
subproblems due to variable systems conditions, and it is
therefore important to allow γ to vary both by device and
by iteration. This is one of the motivations for our proposed
framework discussed in the next sections. For ease of nota-
tion, we ﬁrst derive our main convergence results assuming
a uniform γ as deﬁned here (Section 4), and then provide
results with variable γ’s in Corollary 9.
3.1
Federated Averaging (FedAvg)
In Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017),
the local surrogate of the global objective function at de-
vice k is Fk (·), and the local solver is stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), with the same learning rate and number
of local epochs used on each device. At each round, a
subset K ≪N of the total devices are selected and run
SGD locally for E number of epochs, and then the resulting
model updates are averaged. The details of FedAvg are
summarized in Algorithm 1.
McMahan et al. (2017) show empirically that it is crucial to
tune the optimization hyperparameters of FedAvg properly.
In particular, the number of local epochs in FedAvg plays
an important role in convergence. On one hand, perform-
ing more local epochs allows for more local computation
and potentially reduced communication, which can greatly
improve the overall convergence speed in communication-
constrained networks. On the other hand, with dissimilar
(heterogeneous) local objectives Fk, a larger number of local
epochs may lead each device towards the optima of its local
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
Algorithm 1 Federated Averaging (FedAvg)
Input: K, T, η, E, w0, N, pk, k = 1, · · · , N
for t = 0, · · · , T −1 do
Server selects a subset St of K devices at random (each
device k is chosen with probability pk)
Server sends wt to all chosen devices
Each device k ∈St updates wt for E epochs of SGD
on Fk with step-size η to obtain wt+1
k
Each device k ∈St sends wt+1
k
back to the server
Server aggregates the w’s as wt+1 =
1
K
P
k∈St wt+1
k
end for
objective as opposed to the global objective—potentially
hurting convergence or even causing the method to diverge.
Further, in federated networks with heterogeneous systems
resources, setting the number of local epochs to be high
may increase the risk that devices do not complete training
within a given communication round and must therefore
drop out of the procedure (Bonawitz et al., 2019).
In practice, it is therefore important to ﬁnd a way to set the
local epochs to be high (to reduce communication) while
also allowing for robust convergence. More fundamentally,
we note that the ‘best’ setting for the number of local epochs
is likely to change at each iteration and on each device—as
a function of both the local data and available systems re-
sources. Indeed, a more natural approach than mandating a
ﬁxed number of local epochs is to allow the epochs to vary
according to the characteristics of the network, and to care-
fully merge solutions by accounting for this heterogeneity.
We formalize this strategy in FedProx, introduced below.
3.2
Proposed Framework: FedProx
Our proposed framework, FedProx (Algorithm 2), is simi-
lar to FedAvg in that a subset of devices are selected at each
round, local updates are performed, and these updates are
then averaged to form a global update. However, FedProx
makes the following simple yet critical modiﬁcations, which
result in signiﬁcant empirical improvements and also allow
us to provide convergence guarantees for the method.
Tolerating partial work. As previously discussed, dif-
ferent devices in federated networks often have different
resource constraints in terms of the computing hardware,
network connections, and battery levels. Therefore, it is un-
realistic to force each device to perform a uniform amount
of work (i.e., running the same number of local epochs,
E), as in FedAvg. In FedProx, we generalize FedAvg
by allowing for variable amounts of work to be performed
locally across devices based on their available systems re-
sources, and then aggregate the partial solutions sent from
the stragglers (as compared to dropping these devices). In
other words, instead of assuming a uniform γ for all de-
vices throughout the training process, FedProx implicitly
accommodates variable γ’s for different devices and at dif-
ferent iterations. We formally deﬁne γt
k-inexactness for
device k at iteration t below, which is a natural extension
from Deﬁnition 1.
Deﬁnition
2
(γt
k-inexact
solution).
For
a
function
hk(w; wt) = Fk(w) + µ
2 ∥w −wt∥2, and γ ∈[0, 1], we
say w∗is a γt
k-inexact solution of minw hk(w; wt)
if
∥∇hk(w∗; wt)∥
≤
γt
k∥∇hk(wt; wt)∥,
where
∇hk(w; wt) = ∇Fk(w) + µ(w −wt).
Note that a
smaller γt
k corresponds to higher accuracy.
Analogous to Deﬁnition 1, γt
k measures how much local
computation is performed to solve the local subproblem
on device k at the t-th round. The variable number of
local iterations can be viewed as a proxy of γt
k. Utilizing
the more ﬂexible γt
k-inexactness, we can readily extend
the convergence results under Deﬁnition 1 (Theorem 4) to
consider issues related to systems heterogeneity such as
stragglers (see Corollary 9).
Proximal term. As mentioned in Section 3.1, while toler-
ating nonuniform amounts of work to be performed across
devices can help alleviate negative impacts of systems het-
erogeneity, too many local updates may still (potentially)
cause the methods to diverge due to the underlying hetero-
geneous data. We propose to add a proximal term to the
local subproblem to effectively limit the impact of variable
local updates. In particular, instead of just minimizing the
local function Fk(·), device k uses its local solver of choice
to approximately minimize the following objective hk:
min
w hk(w; wt) = Fk(w) + µ
2 ∥w −wt∥2 .
(2)
The proximal term is beneﬁcial in two aspects: (1) It ad-
dresses the issue of statistical heterogeneity by restricting
the local updates to be closer to the initial (global) model
without any need to manually set the number of local epochs.
(2) It allows for safely incorporating variable amounts of
local work resulting from systems heterogeneity. We sum-
marize the steps of FedProx in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 FedProx (Proposed Framework)
Input: K, T, µ, γ, w0, N, pk, k = 1, · · · , N
for t = 0, · · · , T −1 do
Server selects a subset St of K devices at random (each
device k is chosen with probability pk)
Server sends wt to all chosen devices
Each chosen device k
∈
St
ﬁnds a wt+1
k
which is a γt
k-inexact minimizer of:
wt+1
k
≈
arg minw hk(w; wt) = Fk(w) + µ
2 ∥w −wt∥2
Each device k ∈St sends wt+1
k
back to the server
Server aggregates the w’s as wt+1 =
1
K
P
k∈St wt+1
k
end for
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
We note that proximal terms such as the one above are a
popular tool utilized throughout the optimization literature;
for completeness, we provide a more detailed discussion
on this in Appendix B. An important distinction of the pro-
posed usage is that we suggest, explore, and analyze such a
term for the purpose of tackling heterogeneity in federated
networks. Our analysis (Section 4) is also unique in con-
sidering solving such an objective in a distributed setting
with: (1) non-IID partitioned data, (2) the use of any local
solver, (3) variable inexact updates across devices, and (4) a
subset of devices being active at each round. These assump-
tions are critical to providing a characterization of such a
framework in realistic federated scenarios.
In our experiments (Section 5), we demonstrate that tol-
erating partial work is beneﬁcial in the presence of sys-
tems heterogeneity and our modiﬁed local subproblem in
FedProx results in more robust and stable convergence
compared to vanilla FedAvg for heterogeneous datasets.
In Section 4, we also see that the usage of the proximal
term makes FedProx more amenable to theoretical analy-
sis (i.e., the local objective may be more well-behaved). In
particular, if µ is chosen accordingly, the Hessian of hk may
be positive semi-deﬁnite. Hence, when Fk is non-convex,
hk will be convex, and when Fk is convex, it becomes µ-
strongly convex.
Finally,
we note that since FedProx makes only
lightweight modiﬁcations to FedAvg, this allows us to
reason about the behavior of the widely-used FedAvg
method, and enables easy integration of FedProx into
existing packages/systems, such as TensorFlow Federated
and LEAF (TFF; Caldas et al., 2018). In particular, we
note that FedAvg is a special case of FedProx with (1)
µ = 0, (2) the local solver speciﬁcally chosen to be SGD,
and (3) a constant γ (corresponding to the number of local
epochs) across devices and updating rounds (i.e., no notion
of systems heterogeneity). FedProx is in fact much more
general in this regard, as it allows for partial work to be per-
formed across devices and any local (possibly non-iterative)
solver to be used on each device.
4
FE DPR O X: CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS
FedAvg and FedProx are stochastic algorithms by nature:
in each round, only a fraction of the devices are sampled
to perform the update, and the updates performed on each
device may be inexact. It is well known that in order for
stochastic methods to converge to a stationary point, a de-
creasing step-size is required. This is in contrast to non-
stochastic methods, e.g., gradient descent, that can ﬁnd a
stationary point by employing a constant step-size. In or-
der to analyze the convergence behavior of methods with
constant step-size (as is usually implemented in practice),
we need to quantify the degree of dissimilarity among the
local objective functions. This could be achieved by assum-
ing the data to be IID, i.e., homogeneous across devices.
Unfortunately, in realistic federated networks, this assump-
tion is impractical. Thus, we ﬁrst propose a metric that
speciﬁcally measures the dissimilarity among local func-
tions (Section 4.1), and then analyze FedProx under this
assumption while allowing for variable γ’s (Section 4.2).
4.1
Local dissimilarity
Here we introduce a measure of dissimilarity between the
devices in a federated network, which is sufﬁcient to prove
convergence. This can also be satisﬁed via a simpler and
more restrictive bounded variance assumption of the gradi-
ents (Corollary 10), which we explore in our experiments in
Section 5. Interestingly, similar assumptions (e.g., Schmidt
& Roux, 2013; Vaswani et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2018) have
been explored elsewhere but for differing purposes; we pro-
vide a discussion of these works in Appendix B.
Deﬁnition 3 (B-local dissimilarity). The local functions
Fk are B-locally dissimilar at w if Ek

∥∇Fk(w)∥2
≤
∥∇f(w)∥2B2. We further deﬁne B(w)=
q
Ek[∥∇Fk(w)∥2]
∥∇f(w)∥2
for2 ∥∇f(w)∦=0.
Here Ek[·] denotes the expectation over devices with masses
pk = nk/n and PN
k=1 pk = 1 (as in Equation 1). Deﬁni-
tion 3 can be seen as a generalization of the IID assumption
with bounded dissimilarity, while allowing for statistical het-
erogeneity. As a sanity check, when all the local functions
are the same, we have B(w) = 1 for all w. However, in the
federated setting, the data distributions are often heteroge-
neous and B > 1 due to sampling discrepancies even if the
samples are assumed to be IID. Let us also consider the case
where Fk (·)’s are associated with empirical risk objectives.
If the samples on all the devices are homogeneous, i.e., they
are sampled in an IID fashion, then as mink nk →∞, it
follows that B(w) →1 for every w as all the local functions
converge to the same expected risk function in the large sam-
ple limit. Thus, B(w) ≥1 and the larger the value of B(w),
the larger is the dissimilarity among the local functions.
Using Deﬁnition 3, we now state our formal dissimilarity
assumption, which we use in our convergence analysis. This
simply requires that the dissimilarity deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3
is bounded. As discussed later, our convergence rate is a
function of the statistical heterogeneity/device dissimilarity
in the network.
Assumption 1 (Bounded dissimilarity). For some ϵ > 0,
there exists a Bϵ such that for all the points w ∈Sc
ϵ =
{w | ∥∇f(w)∥2 > ϵ}, B(w) ≤Bϵ.
2As
an
exception
we
deﬁne
B(w)
=
1
when
Ek

∥∇Fk(w)∥2
= ∥∇f(w)∥2, i.e.
w is a stationary so-
lution that all the local functions Fk agree on.
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
For most practical machine learning problems, there is no
need to solve the problem to highly accurate stationary so-
lutions, i.e., ϵ is typically not very small. Indeed, it is well-
known that solving the problem beyond some threshold may
even hurt generalization performance due to overﬁtting (Yao
et al., 2007). Although in practical federated learning prob-
lems the samples are not IID, they are still sampled from
distributions that are not entirely unrelated (if this were the
case, e.g., ﬁtting a single global model w across devices
would be ill-advised). Thus, it is reasonable to assume that
the dissimilarity between local functions remains bounded
throughout the training process. We also measure the dis-
similarity metric empirically on real and synthetic datasets
in Section 5.3.3 and show that this metric captures real-
world statistical heterogeneity and is correlated with practi-
cal performance (the smaller the dissimilarity, the better the
convergence).
4.2
FedProx Analysis
Using the bounded dissimilarity assumption (Assumption 1),
we now analyze the amount of expected decrease in the
objective when one step of FedProx is performed. Our
convergence rate (Theorem 6) can be directly derived from
the results of the expected decrease per updating round. We
assume the same γt
k for any k, t for ease of notation in the
following analyses.
Theorem 4 (Non-convex FedProx convergence: B-local
dissimilarity). Let Assumption 1 hold. Assume the functions
Fk are non-convex, L-Lipschitz smooth, and there exists
L−> 0, such that ∇2Fk ⪰−L−I, with ¯µ := µ −L−> 0.
Suppose that wt is not a stationary solution and the local
functions Fk are B-dissimilar, i.e. B(wt) ≤B. If µ, K,
and γ in Algorithm 2 are chosen such that
ρ=
 
1
µ −γB
µ −B(1+γ)
√
2
¯µ
√
K
−LB(1+γ)
¯µµ
−L(1+γ)2B2
2¯µ2
−LB2(1+γ)2
¯µ2K

2
√
2K+2

>0,
then at iteration t of Algorithm 2, we have the following
expected decrease in the global objective:
ESt

f(wt+1)

≤f(wt)−ρ∥∇f(wt)∥2,
where St is the set of K devices chosen at iteration t.
We direct the reader to Appendix A.1 for a detailed proof.
The key steps include applying our notion of γ-inexactness
(Deﬁnition 1) for each subproblem and using the bounded
dissimilarity assumption, while allowing for only K de-
vices to be active at each round. This last step in particular
introduces ESt, an expectation with respect to the choice
of devices, St, in round t. We note that in our theory, we
require ¯µ > 0, which is a sufﬁcient but not necessary con-
dition for FedProx to converge. Hence, it is possible that
some other µ (not necessarily satisfying ¯µ > 0) can also
enable convergence, as we explore empirically (Section 5).
Theorem 4 uses the dissimilarity in Deﬁnition 3 to iden-
tify sufﬁcient decrease of the objective value at each itera-
tion for FedProx. In Appendix A.2, we provide a corol-
lary characterizing the performance with a more common
(though slightly more restrictive) bounded variance assump-
tion. This assumption is commonly employed, e.g., when
analyzing methods such as SGD. We next provide sufﬁcient
(but not necessary) conditions that ensure ρ > 0 in Theorem
4 such that sufﬁcient decrease is attainable after each round.
Remark 5. For ρ in Theorem 4 to be positive, we need
γB < 1 and
B
√
K < 1. These conditions help to quantify
the trade-off between dissimilarity (B) and the algorithm
parameters (γ, K).
Finally, we can use the above sufﬁcient decrease to the char-
acterize the rate of convergence to the set of approximate
stationary solutions Ss = {w | E

∥∇f(w)∥2
≤ϵ} under
the bounded dissimilarity assumption, Assumption 1. Note
that these results hold for general non-convex Fk(·).
Theorem 6 (Convergence rate: FedProx). Given some
ϵ > 0, assume that for B ≥Bϵ, µ, γ, and K the assump-
tions of Theorem 4 hold at each iteration of FedProx.
Moreover, f(w0) −f ∗= ∆. Then, after T = O( ∆
ρϵ) itera-
tions of FedProx, we have 1
T
PT −1
t=0 E

∥∇f(wt)∥2
≤ϵ.
While the results thus far hold for non-convex Fk(·), we
can also characterize the convergence for the special case
of convex loss functions with exact minimization in terms
of local objectives (Corollary 7). A proof is provided in
Appendix A.3.
Corollary 7 (Convergence: Convex case). Let the asser-
tions of Theorem 4 hold. In addition, let Fk (·)’s be convex
and γt
k = 0 for any k, t, i.e., all the local problems are
solved exactly, if 1 ≪B ≤0.5
√
K, then we can choose
µ ≈6LB2 from which it follows that ρ ≈
1
24LB2 .
Note that small ϵ in Assumption 1 translates to larger Bϵ.
Corollary 7 suggests that, in order to solve the problem
with increasingly higher accuracies using FedProx, one
needs to increase µ appropriately. We empirically verify
that µ > 0 leads to more stable convergence in Section 5.3.
Moreover, in Corollary 7, if we plug in the upper bound
for Bϵ, under a bounded variance assumption (Corollary
10), the number of required steps to achieve accuracy ϵ is
O( L∆
ϵ
+ L∆σ2
ϵ2
). Our analysis helps to characterize the
performance of FedProx and similar methods when local
functions are dissimilar.
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
Remark 8 (Comparison with SGD).
We note that
FedProx achieves the same asymptotic convergence guar-
antee as SGD: Under the bounded variance assumption, for
small ϵ, if we replace Bϵ with its upper-bound in Corollary
10 and choose µ large enough, the iteration complexity of
FedProx when the subproblems are solved exactly and
Fk(·)’s are convex is O( L∆
ϵ
+ L∆σ2
ϵ2
), the same as SGD
(Ghadimi & Lan, 2013).
To provide context for the rate in Theorem 6, we compare
it with SGD in the convex case in Remark 8. In general,
our analysis of FedProx does not yield convergence rates
that improve upon classical distributed SGD (without local
updating)—even though FedProx possibly performs more
work locally at each communication round. In fact, when
data are generated in a non-identically distributed fashion,
it is possible for local updating schemes such as FedProx
to perform worse than distributed SGD. Therefore, our theo-
retical results do not necessarily demonstrate the superiority
of FedProx over distributed SGD; rather, they provide
sufﬁcient (but not necessary) conditions for FedProx to
converge. Our analysis is the ﬁrst we are aware of to analyze
any federated (i.e., with local-updating schemes and low
device participation) optimization method for Problem (1)
in heterogeneous settings.
Finally, we note that the previous analyses assume no sys-
tems heterogeneity and use the same γ for all devices and it-
erations. However, we can extend them to allow for γ to vary
by device and by iteration (as in Deﬁnition 2), which cor-
responds to allowing devices to perform variable amounts
of work as determined by the local systems conditions. We
provide convergence results with variable γ’s below.
Corollary 9 (Convergence: Variable γ’s). Assume the func-
tions Fk are non-convex, L-Lipschitz smooth, and there ex-
ists L−> 0, such that ∇2Fk ⪰−L−I, with ¯µ := µ−L−>
0. Suppose that wt is not a stationary solution and the local
functions Fk are B-dissimilar, i.e. B(wt) ≤B. If µ, K,
and γt
k in Algorithm 2 are chosen such that
ρt=
 
1
µ −γtB
µ −B(1+γt)
√
2
¯µ
√
K
−LB(1+γt)
¯µµ
−L(1+γt)2B2
2¯µ2
−LB2(1+γt)2
¯µ2K

2
√
2K+2

>0,
then at iteration t of Algorithm 2, we have the following
expected decrease in the global objective:
ESt

f(wt+1)

≤f(wt)−ρt∥∇f(wt)∥2,
where St is the set of K devices chosen at iteration t and
γt=maxk∈St γt
k.
The proof can be easily extended from the proof for The-
orem 4 , noting the fact that Ek[(1 + γt
k)∥∇Fk(wt)∥] ≤
(1 + maxk∈St γt
k)Ek[∥∇Fk(wt)∥].
5
EXPERIMENTS
We now present empirical results for the generalized
FedProx framework. In Section 5.2, we demonstrate the
improved performance of FedProx tolerating partial solu-
tions in the face of systems heterogeneity. In Section 5.3,
we show the effectiveness of FedProx in the settings with
statistical heterogeneity (regardless of systems heterogene-
ity). We also study the effects of statistical heterogeneity
on convergence (Section 5.3.1) and show how empirical
convergence is related to our theoretical bounded dissimilar-
ity assumption (Assumption 1) (Section 5.3.3). We provide
thorough details of the experimental setup in Section 5.1 and
Appendix C. All code, data, and experiments are publicly
available at: github.com/litian96/FedProx.
5.1
Experimental Details
We evaluate FedProx on diverse tasks, models, and real-
world federated datasets. In order to better characterize
statistical heterogeneity and study its effect on convergence,
we also evaluate on a set of synthetic data, which allows
for more precise manipulation of statistical heterogeneity.
We simulate systems heterogeneity by assigning different
amounts of local work to different devices.
Synthetic data.
To generate synthetic data, we follow
a similar setup to that in Shamir et al. (2014), addition-
ally imposing heterogeneity among devices. In particular,
for each device k, we generate samples (Xk, Yk) accord-
ing to the model y = argmax(softmax(Wx + b)), x ∈
R60, W ∈R10×60, b ∈R10. We model Wk ∼N(uk, 1),
bk ∼N(uk, 1), uk ∼N(0, α); xk ∼N(vk, Σ), where the
covariance matrix Σ is diagonal with Σj,j = j−1.2. Each el-
ement in the mean vector vk is drawn from N(Bk, 1), Bk ∼
N(0, β). Therefore, α controls how much local models dif-
fer from each other and β controls how much the local data
at each device differs from that of other devices. We vary
α, β to generate three heterogeneous distributed datasets,
denoted Synthetic (α, β), as shown in Figure 2. We also
generate one IID dataset by setting the same W, b on all
devices and setting Xk to follow the same distribution. Our
goal is to learn a global W and b. Full details are given in
Appendix C.1.
Real data. We also explore four real datasets; statistics are
summarized in Table 1. These datasets are curated from
prior work in federated learning as well as recent feder-
ated learning benchmarks (McMahan et al., 2017; Caldas
et al., 2018). We study a convex classiﬁcation problem with
MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) using multinomial logistic re-
gression. To impose statistical heterogeneity, we distribute
the data among 1,000 devices such that each device has
samples of only two digits and the number of samples per
device follows a power law. We then study a more com-
plex 62-class Federated Extended MNIST (Cohen et al.,
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
2017; Caldas et al., 2018) (FEMNIST) dataset using the
same model. For the non-convex setting, we consider a text
sentiment analysis task on tweets from Sentiment140 (Go
et al., 2009) (Sent140) with an LSTM classiﬁer, where each
twitter account corresponds to a device. We also investigate
the task of next-character prediction on the dataset of The
Complete Works of William Shakespeare (McMahan et al.,
2017) (Shakespeare). Each speaking role in the plays is as-
sociated with a different device. Details of datasets, models,
and workloads are provided in Appendix C.1.
Table 1. Statistics of four real federated datasets.
Dataset
Devices
Samples
Samples/device
mean
stdev
MNIST
1,000
69,035
69
106
FEMNIST
200
18,345
92
159
Shakespeare
143
517,106
3,616
6,808
Sent140
772
40,783
53
32
Implementation. We implement FedAvg (Algorithm 1)
and FedProx (Algorithm 2) in Tensorﬂow (Abadi et al.,
2016). In order to draw a fair comparison with FedAvg, we
employ SGD as a local solver for FedProx, and adopt a
slightly different device sampling scheme than that in Algo-
rithms 1 and 2: sampling devices uniformly and then averag-
ing the updates with weights proportional to the number of
local data points (as originally proposed in McMahan et al.
(2017)). While this sampling scheme is not supported by our
analysis, we observe similar relative behavior of FedProx
vs. FedAvg whether or not it is employed. Interestingly,
we also observe that the sampling scheme proposed herein
in fact results in more stable performance for both methods
(see Appendix C.3.4, Figure 12). This suggests an addi-
tional beneﬁt of the proposed framework. Full details are
provided in Appendix C.2.
Hyperparameters & evaluation metrics.
For each
dataset, we tune the learning rate on FedAvg (with E=1
and without systems heterogeneity) and use the same learn-
ing rate for all experiments on that dataset. We set the
number of selected devices to be 10 for all experiments on
all datasets. For each comparison, we ﬁx the randomly se-
lected devices, the stragglers, and mini-batch orders across
all runs. We report all metrics based on the global objec-
tive f(w). Note that in our simulations (see Section 5.2
for details), we assume that each communication round cor-
responds to a speciﬁc aggregation time stamp (measured
in real-world global wall-clock time)—we therefore report
results in terms of rounds rather than FLOPs or wall-clock
time. See details of the hyper-parameters in Appendix C.2.
5.2
Systems Heterogeneity: Tolerating Partial Work
In order to measure the effect of allowing for partial so-
lutions to be sent to handle systems heterogeneity with
FedProx, we simulate federated settings with varying sys-
tem heterogeneity, as described below.
Systems heterogeneity simulations. We assume that there
exists a global clock during training, and each participating
device determines the amount of local work as a function of
this clock cycle and its systems constraints. This speciﬁed
amount of local computation corresponds to some implicit
value γt
k for device k at the t-th iteration. In our simulations,
we ﬁx a global number of epochs E, and force some devices
to perform fewer updates than E epochs given their current
systems constraints. In particular, for varying heterogeneous
settings, at each round, we assign x number of epochs (cho-
sen uniformly at random between [1, E]) to 0%, 50%, and
90% of the selected devices, respectively. Settings where 0%
devices perform fewer than E epochs of work correspond to
the environments without systems heterogeneity, while 90%
of the devices sending their partial solutions corresponds to
highly heterogeneous environments. FedAvg will simply
drop these 0%, 50%, and 90% stragglers upon reaching
the global clock cycle, and FedProx will incorporate the
partial updates from these devices.
In Figure 1, we set E to be 20 and study the effects of aggre-
gating partial work from the otherwise dropped devices. The
synthetic dataset here is taken from Synthetic (1,1) in Figure
2. We see that on all the datasets, systems heterogeneity has
negative effects on convergence, and larger heterogeneity
results in worse convergence (FedAvg). Compared with
dropping the more constrained devices (FedAvg), incor-
porating variable amounts of work (FedProx, µ = 0) is
beneﬁcial and leads to more stable and faster convergence.
We also observe that setting µ > 0 in FedProx can further
improve convergence, as we discuss in Section 5.3.
We additionally investigate two less heterogeneous settings.
First, we limit the capability of all the devices by setting E
to be 1 (i.e., all the devices run at most one local epoch), and
impose systems heterogeneity in a similar way. We show
training loss in Figure 9 and testing accuracy in Figure 10
in the appendix. Even in these settings, allowing for partial
work can improve convergence compared with FedAvg.
Second, we explore a setting without any statistical hetero-
geneity using an identically distributed synthetic dataset
(Synthetic IID). In this IID setting, as shown in Figure 5
in Appendix C.3.2, FedAvg is rather robust under device
failure, and tolerating variable amounts of local work may
not cause major improvement. This serves as an additional
motivation to rigorously study the effect of statistical het-
erogeneity on new methods designed for federated learning,
as simply relying on IID data (a setting unlikely to occur in
practice) may not tell a complete story.
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
0%
stragglers
50% 
stragglers
90% 
stragglers
Figure 1. FedProx results in signiﬁcant convergence improvements relative to FedAvg in heterogeneous networks. We simulate
different levels of systems heterogeneity by forcing 0%, 50%, and 90% devices to be the stragglers (dropped by FedAvg). (1) Comparing
FedAvg and FedProx (µ = 0), we see that allowing for variable amounts of work to be performed can help convergence in the presence
of systems heterogeneity. (2) Comparing FedProx (µ = 0) with FedProx (µ > 0), we show the beneﬁts of our added proximal term.
FedProx with µ > 0 leads to more stable convergence and enables otherwise divergent methods to converge, both in the presence of
systems heterogeneity (50% and 90% stragglers) and without systems heterogeneity (0% stragglers). Note that FedProx with µ = 0 and
without systems heterogeneity (no stragglers) corresponds to FedAvg. We also report testing accuracy in Figure 7, Appendix C.3.2, and
show that FedProx improves the test accuracy on all datasets.
5.3
Statistical Heterogeneity: Proximal Term
To better understand how the proximal term can be beneﬁ-
cial in heterogeneous settings, we ﬁrst show convergence
can become worse as statistical heterogeneity increases.
5.3.1
Effects of Statistical Heterogeneity
In Figure 2 (the ﬁrst row), we study how statistical hetero-
geneity affects convergence using four synthetic datasets
without the presence of systems heterogeneity (ﬁxing E
to be 20). From left to right, as data become more hetero-
geneous, convergence becomes worse for FedProx with
µ = 0 (i.e., FedAvg). Though it may slow convergence
for IID data, we see that setting µ > 0 is particularly useful
in heterogeneous settings. This indicates that the modiﬁed
subproblem introduced in FedProx can beneﬁt practical
federated settings with varying statistical heterogeneity. For
perfectly IID data, some heuristics such as decreasing µ
if the loss continues to decrease may help avoid the decel-
eration of convergence (see Figure 11 in Appendix C.3.3).
In the sections to follow, we see similar results in our non-
synthetic experiments.
5.3.2
Effects of µ > 0
The key parameters of FedProx that affect performance
are the amount of local work (as parameterized by the num-
ber of local epochs, E), and the proximal term scaled by µ.
Intuitively, large E may cause local models to drift too far
away from the initial starting point, thus leading to potential
divergence (McMahan et al., 2017). Therefore, to handle
the divergence or instability of FedAvg with non-IID data,
it is helpful to tune E carefully. However, E is constrained
by the underlying system’s environments on the devices,
and it is difﬁcult to determine an appropriate uniform E for
all devices. Alternatively, it is beneﬁcial to allow for device-
speciﬁc E’s (variable γ’s) and tune a best µ (a parameter
that can be viewed as a re-parameterization of E) to prevent
divergence and improve the stability of methods. A proper
µ can restrict the trajectory of the iterates by constraining
the iterates to be closer to that of the global model, thus
incorporating variable amounts of updates and guaranteeing
convergence (Theorem 6).
We show the effects of the proximal term in FedProx
(µ > 0) in Figure 1. For each experiment, we compare the
results between FedProx with µ = 0 and FedProx with
a best µ (see the next paragraph for discussions on how to
select µ). For all datasets, we observe that the appropriate µ
can increase the stability for unstable methods and can force
divergent methods to converge. This holds both when there
is systems heterogeneity (50% and 90% stragglers) and
there is no systems heterogeneity (0% stragglers). µ > 0
also increases the accuracy in most cases (see Figure 6
and Figure 7 in Appendix C.3.2). In particular, FedProx
improves absolute testing accuracy relative to FedAvg by
22% on average in highly heterogeneous environments (90%
stragglers) (see Figure 7).
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Training Loss
Synthetic-IID
FedAvg (FedProx, =0)
FedProx, >0
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
1
2
3
Synthetic (0,0)
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
1
2
3
Synthetic (0.5,0.5)
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
1
2
3
Synthetic (1,1)
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Variance of Local Grad.
Synthetic-IID
FedAvg (FedProx, =0)
FedProx, >0
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
10
20
30
40
Synthetic (0,0)
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
20
40
60
Synthetic (0.5,0.5)
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
25
50
75
100
Synthetic (1,1)
Figure 2. Effect of data heterogeneity on convergence. We remove the effects of systems heterogeneity by forcing each device to run the
same amount of epochs. In this setting, FedProx with µ = 0 reduces to FedAvg. (1) Top row: We show training loss (see results on
testing accuracy in Appendix C.3, Figure 6) on four synthetic datasets whose statistical heterogeneity increases from left to right. Note
that the method with µ = 0 corresponds to FedAvg. Increasing heterogeneity leads to worse convergence, but setting µ > 0 can help to
combat this. (2) Bottom row: We show the corresponding dissimilarity measurement (variance of gradients) of the four synthetic datasets.
This metric captures statistical heterogeneity and is consistent with training loss — smaller dissimilarity indicates better convergence.
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Training Loss
Synthetic-IID
FedAvg (FedProx, =0)
FedProx, dynamic 
FedProx, >0
0
50
100
150
200
# Rounds
1
2
3
Synthetic (1,1)
Figure 3. Effectiveness of setting µ adaptively based on the current
model performance. We increase µ by 0.1 whenever the loss
increases and decreases it by 0.1 whenever the loss decreases for
5 consecutive rounds. We initialize µ to 1 for Synthetic IID (in
order to be adversarial to our methods), and initialize µ to 0 for
Synthetic (1,1). This simple heuristic works well empirically.
Choosing µ. One natural question is to determine how to
set the penalty constant µ in the proximal term. A large µ
may potentially slow the convergence by forcing the updates
to be close to the starting point, while a small µ may not
make any difference. In all experiments, we tune the best
µ from the limited candidate set {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1}. For
the ﬁve federated datasets in Figure 1, the best µ values are
1, 1, 1, 0.001, and 0.01, respectively. While automatically
tuning µ is difﬁcult to instantiate directly from our theoret-
ical results, in practice, we note that µ can be adaptively
chosen based on the current performance of the model. For
example, one simple heuristic is to increase µ when seeing
the loss increasing and decreasing µ when seeing the loss
decreasing. In Figure 3, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
this heuristic using two synthetic datasets. Note that we start
from initial µ values that are adversarial to our methods. We
provide full results showing the competitive performance
of this approach in Appendix C.3.3. Future work includes
developing methods to automatically tune this parameter
for heterogeneous datasets, based, e.g., on the theoretical
groundwork provided here.
5.3.3
Dissimilarity Measurement and Divergence
Finally, in Figure 2 (the bottom row), we demonstrate that
our B-local dissimilarity measurement in Deﬁnition 3 cap-
tures the heterogeneity of datasets and is therefore an appro-
priate proxy of performance. In particular, we track the vari-
ance of gradients on each device, Ek[∥∇Fk(w)−∇f(w)∥2],
which is lower bounded by Bϵ (see Bounded Variance Equiv-
alence Corollary 10). Empirically, we observe that increas-
ing µ leads to smaller dissimilarity among local functions
Fk, and that the dissimilarity metric is consistent with the
training loss. Therefore, smaller dissimilarity indicates bet-
ter convergence, which can be enforced by setting µ ap-
propriately. We also show the dissimilarity metric on real
federated data in Appendix C.3.2.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed FedProx, an optimization
framework that tackles the systems and statistical hetero-
geneity inherent in federated networks. FedProx allows
for variable amounts of work to be performed locally across
devices, and relies on a proximal term to help stabilize
the method. We provide the convergence guarantees for
FedProx in realistic federated settings under a device dis-
similarity assumption, while also accounting for practical
issues such as stragglers. Our empirical evaluation across a
suite of federated datasets has validated our theoretical anal-
ysis and demonstrated that the FedProx framework can
signiﬁcantly improve the convergence behavior of federated
learning in realistic heterogeneous networks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Sebastian Caldas, Jakub Koneˇcn´y, Brendan
McMahan, Nathan Srebro, and Jianyu Wang for their help-
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
ful discussions. AT and VS are supported in part by DARPA
FA875017C0141, the National Science Foundation grants
IIS1705121 and IIS1838017, an Okawa Grant, a Google
Faculty Award, an Amazon Web Services Award, a JP Mor-
gan A.I. Research Faculty Award, a Carnegie Bosch Institute
Research Award, and the CONIX Research Center, one of
six centers in JUMP, a Semiconductor Research Corpora-
tion (SRC) program sponsored by DARPA. Any opinions,
ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-
essarily reﬂect the views of DARPA, the National Science
Foundation, or any other funding agency.
REFERENCES
Tensorﬂow federated:
Machine learning on decentral-
ized data. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/
federated.
Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean,
J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., Isard, M., Kudlur,
M. K., Levenberg, J., Monga, R., Moore, S., Murray,
D. G., Steiner, B., Tucker, P., Vasudevan, V., Warden, P.,
Wicke, M., Yu, Y., and Zheng, X. Tensorﬂow: A system
for large-scale machine learning. In Operating Systems
Design and Implementation, 2016.
Allen-Zhu, Z. How to make the gradients small stochas-
tically: Even faster convex and nonconvex sgd. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Bonawitz, K., Eichner, H., Grieskamp, W., Huba, D., Inger-
man, A., Ivanov, V., Kiddon, C., Konecny, J., Mazzocchi,
S., McMahan, H. B., Overveldt, T. V., Petrou, D., Ram-
age, D., and Roselander, J. Towards federated learning at
scale: system design. In Conference on Machine Learn-
ing and Systems, 2019.
Boyd, S., Parikh, N., Chu, E., Peleato, B., and Eckstein, J.
Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the
alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations
and Trends in Machine Learning, 2010.
Caldas, S., Wu, P., Li, T., Koneˇcn`y, J., McMahan, H. B.,
Smith, V., and Talwalkar, A. Leaf: A benchmark for fed-
erated settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
Cohen, G., Afshar, S., Tapson, J., and van Schaik, A. Em-
nist: an extension of mnist to handwritten letters. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1702.05373, 2017.
Dean, J., Corrado, G., Monga, R., Chen, K., Devin, M., Le,
Q. V., Mao, M., Ranzato, M., Senior, A., Tucker, P., Yang,
K., and Ng, A. Large scale distributed deep networks.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2012.
Dekel, O., Gilad-Bachrach, R., Shamir, O., and Xiao, L. Op-
timal Distributed Online Prediction Using Mini-Batches.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2012.
Ghadimi, S. and Lan, G. Stochastic ﬁrst-and zeroth-order
methods for nonconvex stochastic programming. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 2013.
Go, A., Bhayani, R., and Huang, L. Twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation using distant supervision. CS224N Project
Report, Stanford, 2009.
Goldblum, M., Reich, S., Fowl, L., Ni, R., Cherepanova,
V., and Goldstein, T. Unraveling meta-learning: Under-
standing feature representations for few-shot tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.06753, 2020.
Hao, Y., Rong, J., and Sen, Y. On the linear speedup analysis
of communication efﬁcient momentum sgd for distributed
non-convex optimization. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2019.
Huang, L., Yin, Y., Fu, Z., Zhang, S., Deng, H., and
Liu, D.
Loadaboost: Loss-based adaboost federated
machine learning on medical data.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.12629, 2018.
Jeong, E., Oh, S., Kim, H., Park, J., Bennis, M., and Kim, S.-
L. Communication-efﬁcient on-device machine learning:
Federated distillation and augmentation under non-iid
private data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11479, 2018.
Jiang, P. and Agrawal, G. A linear speedup analysis of dis-
tributed deep learning with sparse and quantized commu-
nication. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2018.
Kaczmarz, S. Approximate solution of systems of linear
equations. International Journal of Control, 1993.
Khodak, M., Balcan, M.-F. F., and Talwalkar, A. S. Adaptive
gradient-based meta-learning methods. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., and Haffner, P. Gradient-
based learning applied to document recognition. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 1998.
Li, M., Andersen, D. G., Smola, A. J., and Yu, K. Com-
munication efﬁcient distributed machine learning with
the parameter server. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2014a.
Li, M., Zhang, T., Chen, Y., and Smola, A. J. Efﬁcient mini-
batch training for stochastic optimization. In Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2014b.
Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks
Li, T., Sahu, A., Talwalkar, A., and Smith, V. Federated
learning: Challenges, methods, and future directions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07873, 2019.
Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Zaheer, M., Sanjabi, M., Talwalkar, A.,
and Smith, V. Feddane: A federated newton-type method.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01920, 2020.
Lin, T., Stich, S. U., and Jaggi, M. Don’t use large mini-
batches, use local sgd. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2020.
McMahan, H. B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S.,
and Arcas, B. A. y. Communication-efﬁcient learning of
deep networks from decentralized data. In International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 2017.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. Glove: Global
vectors for word representation. In Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2014.
Reddi, S. J., Koneˇcn`y, J., Richt´arik, P., P´ocz´os, B., and
Smola, A. Aide: Fast and communication efﬁcient dis-
tributed optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.06879,
2016.
Richt´arik, P. and Tak´aˇc, M. Distributed coordinate descent
method for learning with big data. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 2016.
Schmidt, M. and Roux, N. L. Fast convergence of stochastic
gradient descent under a strong growth condition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1308.6370, 2013.
Shamir, O., Srebro, N., and Zhang, T. Communication-
efﬁcient distributed optimization using an approximate
newton-type method. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2014.
Smith, V., Chiang, C.-K., Sanjabi, M., and Talwalkar, A. S.
Federated multi-task learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Smith, V., Forte, S., Ma, C., Takac, M., Jordan, M. I.,
and Jaggi, M.
Cocoa:
A general framework for
communication-efﬁcient distributed optimization. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 2018.
Stich, S. U. Local sgd converges fast and communicates
little. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2019.
Strohmer, T. and Vershynin, R. A randomized kaczmarz al-
gorithm with exponential convergence. Journal of Fourier
Analysis and Applications, 2009.
Vaswani, S., Bach, F., and Schmidt, M. Fast and faster
convergence of sgd for over-parameterized models (and
an accelerated perceptron). In International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.
Wang,
J.
and
Joshi,
G.
Cooperative
sgd:
A
uniﬁed framework for the design and analysis of
communication-efﬁcient sgd algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.07576, 2018.
Wang, S., Tuor, T., Salonidis, T., Leung, K. K., Makaya,
C., He, T., and Chan, K. Adaptive federated learning
in resource constrained edge computing systems. IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2019.
Woodworth, B. E., Wang, J., Smith, A., McMahan, B.,
and Srebro, N. Graph oracle models, lower bounds, and
gaps for parallel stochastic optimization. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Yao, Y., Rosasco, L., and Caponnetto, A. On early stopping
in gradient descent learning. Constructive Approximation,
2007.
Yin, D., Pananjady, A., Lam, M., Papailiopoulos, D., Ram-
chandran, K., and Bartlett, P. Gradient diversity: a key
ingredient for scalable distributed learning. In Interna-
tional Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics,
2018.
Yu, H., Yang, S., and Zhu, S. Parallel restarted sgd for
non-convex optimization with faster convergence and
less communication. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 2018.
Zhang, S., Choromanska, A. E., and LeCun, Y. Deep learn-
ing with elastic averaging sgd. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2015.
Zhang,
Y.,
Duchi,
J. C.,
and Wainwright,
M. J.
Communication-efﬁcient algorithms for statistical opti-
mization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2013.
Zhao, Y., Li, M., Lai, L., Suda, N., Civin, D., and Chandra,
V. Federated learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.
Zhou, F. and Cong, G. On the convergence properties of
a k-step averaging stochastic gradient descent algorithm
for nonconvex optimization. In International Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.
Zhou, P., Yuan, X., Xu, H., Yan, S., and Feng, J. Efﬁcient
meta learning via minibatch proximal update. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
