8604
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
MP-FedCL: Multiprototype Federated Contrastive
Learning for Edge Intelligence
Yu Qiao
, Md. Shirajum Munir
, Member, IEEE, Apurba Adhikary
, Huy Q. Le
, Avi Deb Raha,
Chaoning Zhang, Member, IEEE, and Choong Seon Hong
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Federated learning-assisted edge intelligence enables
privacy protection in modern intelligent services. However, not
independent and identically distributed (non-IID) distribution
among edge clients can impair the local model performance.
The existing single prototype-based strategy represents a class by
using the mean of the feature space. However, feature spaces are
usually not clustered, and a single prototype may not represent
a class well. Motivated by this, this article proposes a multi-
prototype federated contrastive learning approach (MP-FedCL)
which demonstrates the effectiveness of using a multiprototype
strategy over a single-prototype under non-IID settings, includ-
ing both label and feature skewness. Speciﬁcally, a multiprototype
computation strategy based on k-means is ﬁrst proposed to cap-
ture different embedding representations for each class space,
using multiple prototypes (k centroids) to represent a class in the
embedding space. In each global round, the computed multiple
prototypes and their respective model parameters are sent to
the edge server for aggregation into a global prototype pool,
which is then sent back to all clients to guide their local train-
ing. Finally, local training for each client minimizes their own
supervised learning tasks and learns from shared prototypes in
the global prototype pool through supervised contrastive learn-
ing, which encourages them to learn knowledge related to their
own class from others and reduces the absorption of unre-
lated knowledge in each global iteration. Experimental results
on MNIST, Digit-5, Ofﬁce-10, and DomainNet show that our
Manuscript received 16 August 2023; revised 20 September 2023; accepted
22 September 2023. Date of publication 28 September 2023; date of
current version 21 February 2024. This work was supported in part by
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the
Korea Government (MSIT) under Grant RS-2023-00207816; in part by
the Institute of Information and Communications Technology Planning and
Evaluation (IITP) Grant funded by the Korea Government (MSIT) (Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Innovation Hub) under Grant 2021-0-02068, through the Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Convergence Innovation Human Resources Development (Kyung
Hee University) under Grant RS-2022-00155911, and through the Evolvable
Deep Learning Model Generation Platform for Edge Computing under
Grant 2019-0-01287; in part by the MSIT under the ITRC Support Program
supervised by the IITP under Grant IITP-2023-RS-2023-00258649; and in
part by the Kyung Hee University in 2022 under Grant KHU-20222221.
(Corresponding authors: Choong Seon Hong; Chaoning Zhang.)
Yu
Qiao
and
Chaoning
Zhang
are
with
the
Department
of
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence,
School
of
Computing,
Kyung
Hee
University,
Yongin
17104,
Republic
of
Korea
(e-mail:
qiaoyu@khu.ac.kr;
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com).
Md. Shirajum Munir is with the School of Cyber Security, Old Dominion
University, Suffolk, VA 2343 USA, and also with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 17104, Republic of
Korea (e-mail: munir@khu.ac.kr).
Apurba Adhikary, Huy Q. Le, Avi Deb Raha, and Choong Seon
Hong are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
School of Computing, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 17104, Republic of
Korea (e-mail: apurba@khu.ac.kr; quanghuy69@khu.ac.kr; avi@khu.ac.kr;
cshong@khu.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3320250
method outperforms multiple baselines, with an average test
accuracy improvement of about 4.6% and 10.4% under feature
and label non-IID distributions, respectively.
Index Terms—Communication efﬁciency, contrastive learning,
edge intelligence, federated learning (FL), global prototype pool,
label and feature not independent and identically distributed
(non-IID), multiprototype.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
NCREASINGLY,
intelligence
devices
in
distributed
networks are showing explosive growth, which generates
a huge amount of raw data that needs to be processed [1].
Because of the challenges of limitation in network bandwidth
or the requirements for transmission delay, the traditional
cloud computing paradigm that uploads such big data to a
cloud center for data processing can no longer meet these
demands [2]. Thanks to the improvements in storage and
computing capabilities of edge intelligence devices, most
computing tasks can now be completed directly at the edge,
making the mobile-edge computing (MEC) paradigm the
next-generation computing network [3]. Further, collecting
data from distributed devices poses risks and challenges due
to the sensitive nature of a large amount of data, as well as
regulations, such as the general data protection regulation
(GDPR) [4] in Europe. Therefore, as edge devices’ storage
and computing power continue to grow, coupled with concerns
about privacy issues, it becomes more attractive to implement
edge intelligence in MEC systems in a distributed manner [5].
To this end, federated learning (FL), as one application
of edge computing in distributed machine learning, is ﬁrst
proposed by [6] to simultaneously achieve edge intelligence
and address privacy concerns. It trains a global model through
the cooperation between local clients and an edge server
while keeping the clients’ raw data within their respective
local environments. In general, the typical federated training
process consists of the following four steps [6].
1) The server chooses a certain network architecture, such
as convolutional neural network (CNN) as the global
model to be optimized and sends it to local clients.
2) The clients update the received the model parameters of
the global model based on their local data.
3) All clients send their updated model parameters back to
the edge server for aggregation.
4) The server averages all the sent parameters as the new
global model parameters for the next global round,
repeating these four steps until convergence.
2327-4662 c⃝2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8605
In this fashion, FL’s ability to protect data conﬁdentiality
and enable multiple parties to cooperatively train a model
makes it a highly promising technology for the future of
network intelligence [7].
Nonetheless, a main challenge in FL is that data distribu-
tion among clients is usually not independent and identically
distributed (non-IID), which can result in reduced effective-
ness of FL [8], [9]. To tackle the issue, existing research
works under non-IID scenarios can be mainly divided into
two categories in terms of optimization objectives, i.e., typical
FL [6], [10], [11], [12] and personalized FL [9], [13], [14],
[15], [16]. The former objective is to develop a single shared
global model that is accurate and efﬁcient, while also capable
of adapting to the unique characteristics of each client’s data.
FedAvg [6] is the ﬁrst FL optimization algorithm to enable
efﬁcient training of machine learning models on decentralized
data. It achieves this through collaborative training of a shared
global model via model parameter transmission among clients
in each global round. FedLC [10] adopts a ﬁne-grained cali-
bration strategy for clients’ cross-entropy loss to mitigate the
bias caused by label distribution skewness among clients in
the global model. However, training the global model directly
with heterogeneous data from local clients can result in poor
generalization abilities to unseen data [17]. In contrast, the
latter approach focuses on optimizing local models individu-
ally for each client rather than using a shared global model.
This is typically achieved by adding a regularization term to
the local objective of each client to guide their local train-
ing, which enables the models to generalize well to new data.
FedProx [9] proposes to add a local regularization term in
the local objective of each client to correct the bias between
local models and the global model. PFedMe [13] proposes to
add an additional term to allow clients to update their local
models in different directions without deviating from a global
reference point. FedPer [15] proposes a strategy of adding
a personalized layer to the base layer and suggests updat-
ing only the base layer during the federated training process.
Afterward, clients can update their personalized layer based
on their own local data. Additionally, Li et al. [18] explored a
benchmark for non-IID settings, they divide non-IID settings
into ﬁve cases, such as label distribution skew, feature distribu-
tion skew, quantity skew, etc. Further, as [18] mentioned, some
existing studies [9], [10], [11], [19] cover only one non-IID
case, which do not give sufﬁcient evaluations to this challenge.
Therefore, to avoid the inﬂuence of biased global models and
to evaluate non-IID cases as comprehensively as possible, we
focus on personalized FL by optimizing the local objective
of each local client under the label and feature distribution
skewness.
Inspired by prototypical networks [22], which adopts a sin-
gle prototype to represent each class by calculating the mean
of the class’s embedding space. This prototype can serve as
an important information carrier to boost the performance of
various learning domains, and has been successfully applied
in meta-learning [23], multitask learning [24], and transfer
learning [25]. There have been some existing works [19],
[26], [27], [28] introducing the concept of prototypes into FL.
FedProto [19] proposes to reduce communication overhead
by only exchanging prototypes between clients and the
server, instead of exchanging gradients or model parameters.
FedPCL [27] proposes to use multiple pretrained models to
extract the features separately, and then they use a projec-
tion network to fuse these extracted features in a personalized
way while keeping the shared representation compact for
efﬁcient communication. These works adopt a single proto-
type to represent each class and argue that directly averaging
the representations from heterogeneous data across clients
can effectively capture the embedding representations of each
class.
However, in their approach, they represent each class with
a single prototype obtained by averaging over the same class
space for each client, which can be considered intuitively
incomplete and ambiguous [29]. For instance, consider the
class of dogs, which includes various breeds differing in size,
color, or appearance. Averaging all the dogs within the same
class may not adequately capture the diversity and distinc-
tive features present in different dog breeds. This limitation
could lead to a less expressive and less discriminative rep-
resentation for each class, potentially impacting the overall
model’s performance in scenarios with intraclass variations.
Here, we consider a toy example as shown in Fig. 1 to illus-
trate this intuition. The ﬁgure showcases the embeddings in
the class space during local training (the upper two sub-
ﬁgures) and federated training (the bottom two subﬁgures)
under the setting of data heterogeneity among clients. It
becomes evident from the visualization that there is consid-
erable separation and diversity across the embedding class
space in both training scenarios. In local training, each client
reﬁnes the model using its own data, leading to distinct rep-
resentations of each class. Similarly, in federated training,
where multiple clients collaboratively train the global model,
the embedding space still demonstrates signiﬁcant variations
and differentiation. This observation highlights the nontriv-
ial nature of using a single prototype to sufﬁciently capture
the entire embedding space, whether during local or federated
training.
Motivated by the above intuition, we introduce multipro-
totype federated contrastive learning (MP-FedCL), a strategy
that improves the classiﬁcation performance of FL in scenar-
ios where there is skewness in the distribution of labels and
features. The proposed approach uses a contrastive learning
scheme, which employs multiple prototypes to represent each
class, thereby learning a more differentiated prototype repre-
sentation in the embedding space for each class.
Here, we
are inspired by some recent studies [29], [30], [31], which
use k-means to cluster features in their methods. For instance,
Rippel et al. [30] employed k-means clustering to learn a
density representation within the embedding space. Moreover,
in recent studies by [29] and [31], a method for calculating
multiple prototypes based on k-means clustering was proposed
and achieved good results in image classiﬁcation tasks. These
ﬁndings highlight the effectiveness of using k-means clustering
to perform feature-based clustering. However, it has not been
validated in the FL setting, and our scheme is the ﬁrst new
attempt to introduce the concept of multiprototype into FL.
Speciﬁcally, our proposed strategy ﬁrst applies the k-means
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8606
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Fig. 1.
Toy example: T-SNE [20] visualization of the embedding vectors of local clients. The sample distribution for each client follows the Dirichlet
distribution [21] with Dir(0.1). The upper two represent local training, which means no communication with other clients. The below two represent federated
training based on FedAvg.
clustering algorithm to multiple prototypes calculation, in
which each client can calculate their own multiple prototypes
for each class. Note that considering the ever-increasing com-
puting capabilities of local clients [5], [32], [33] and privacy
issues caused by transferring raw data features [34], [35],
[36], we apply the k-means clustering on the feature space
on the local side. Due to the natural clustering properties of
k-means, the output (i.e., k centroids) of k-means clustering
algorithm can be viewed as the calculated multiple prototypes
for that class. These calculated prototypes from various dis-
tributed clients are then sent to the edge server for aggregation
as a global prototype pool. The global prototype pool is a com-
bination of multiple prototypes from each client, and it can be
updated during training in each global round. To regularize
individual local training, we reformulate the local objective
of each client in a contrastive learning manner by conducting
any supervised learning task (e.g., a cross-entropy loss) and a
contrastive learning task. The goal of the contrastive learning
task is that prototypes in the global prototype pool and local
representations belonging to the same class are pulled together
while simultaneously pushing apart those prototypes from dif-
ferent classes. Note that the k-means clustering algorithm is
conducted on the local side, and the prototype is a 1-D vec-
tor of low-dimensional samples that are naturally small and
privacy-preserving, which does not incur excessive communi-
cation costs or raise privacy concerns compared to the model
parameters. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to
present multiprototype learning in FL. The preliminary version
of this work has been published in [16] where we design a
multiprototype-based federated training framework for model
inference in the last global iteration based on the typical fed-
erated training process. The major differences between the
current work and [16] are the addition of the global prototype
pool based on a contrastive learning strategy, the modiﬁca-
tion of the global iteration process, and the exploration of the
feature distribution skewness. Our main contributions to this
article are as follows.
1) We introduce a k-means-based MP-FedCL framework,
designed to capture both intraclass and interdevice
information. The former can be achieved through the
multiprototype strategy, while the latter can be accom-
plished by the global prototype pool for information
exchange.
2) We reformulate the loss function for each client to per-
form both supervised learning and contrastive learning
tasks. This strategy can encourage each client to learn
their own supervised learning task, while also learning
from the global prototype pool.
3) We demonstrate that our proposed strategy outper-
forms several baselines on multiple benchmark data sets
regarding test accuracy and communication efﬁciency,
with improvements of about 4.6% and 10.4% under
feature and label skewness, respectively.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Related
work on FL and prototype learning is presented in Section II.
The system model and problem formulation are provided in
Section III. The strategy for multiprototype computation and
aggregation, as well as the model inference, are presented in
Section IV. Experimental results are provided in Section V.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we ﬁrst review the existing works to deal
with FL challenges in Section II-A, including the statisti-
cal and system heterogeneity, and communication efﬁciency.
Then, we brieﬂy review some works that apply prototype
learning to FL in Section II-B, followed by a schematic
diagram of our proposed multiprototype FL, which will be
explained in detail in the next section.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8607
A. Federated Learning
One of the key challenges in FL is the distribution of train-
ing data across multiple clients, which is usually statistically
heterogeneous (also known as the non-IID issue). This het-
erogeneity can limit the effectiveness and performance of FL.
Many existing works [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42] are
dedicated to improving communication efﬁciency under the
challenge of statistical heterogeneity. Other works [43], [44],
[45], [46], [47] are mainly from the perspective of system
heterogeneity, dealing with communication efﬁciency issues
under the system heterogeneity.
To tackle the system heterogeneity, FedAT [43] introduces
an asynchronous layer in which clients are grouped accord-
ing to their system-speciﬁc capabilities to avoid the straggler
problem, thus reducing the total number of communication
rounds. Unlike typical federated training processes, which are
usually implemented with synchronous approaches and can
cause stragglers and heterogeneous latency, FedAsync [44]
combines asynchronous training with federated training to
tackle that issue. To solve the lag or dropout problems of dis-
tributed edge devices during federated training, ASO-Fed [45]
presents an online FL strategy, in which edge devices use
continuous streaming local data for online learning and an
edge server aggregated model parameters from clients in an
asynchronous manner. Sageﬂow [46] proposes a robust FL
framework to cope with both stragglers and adversaries prob-
lems. In this framework, clients are grouped and weighted
according to their staleness (i.e., arrival delay). Then, entropy-
based ﬁltering and loss-weighted averaging are applied within
each group to defend against attacks from malicious adver-
saries. Another asynchronous FL framework in a wireless
network environment is proposed in [47]. The framework aims
to adapt to environments with heterogeneous edge devices,
communication environments, and learning tasks by consider-
ing possible delays in local training and uploading local model
parameters, as well as the freshness between received models.
However, most of these works do not consider the statistical
heterogeneity which is the major challenge in FL.
To address the statistical heterogeneity, FedNova [37] sug-
gests that different clients can perform a different number of
local steps when updating their shared global model with their
local private data. SCAFFOLD [38] introduces two control
variables which contain the updated direction information of
the global model and local models to overcome the gradi-
ent difference and effectively alleviate client drift problems.
CMFL [39] designs a feedback mechanism that can reﬂect
the updated trend of the global model. Each client in the
system checks whether it is consistent with the update trend
of the global model before uploading its model updates to
the edge server, otherwise, it does not upload. This strategy
of uploading only information related to model improve-
ment to the server greatly reduces communication overhead.
FedMMD [40] employs a two-stream model to extract a
more generalized representation by minimizing the maximum
mean difference (MMD) loss, which is a measure of the
distance between two data distributions. This approach can
accelerate the convergence rate and reduce communication
rounds. AFD [41] proposes a dynamical submodel parameters
selection method, in which clients can update their mod-
els using a submodel rather than the whole global model
parameters. This submodel selection strategy is performed
by maintaining an independent activation score map for each
client. At each round, the server sends a different submodel
for selected clients, and then clients update their respective
score maps according to their own local loss function. A sim-
ilar approach is also considered in Fed-Dropout [42], which
adopts a lossy compression way for server-to-client commu-
nication while allowing clients to update their models using
submodels of the global model, further reducing communica-
tion overhead. However, most of these works do not consider
the scenario where clients in FL are under heterogeneous
feature distribution.
B. Prototype Learning
Prototype
learning
is
ﬁrst
proposed
by
prototype
networks [22] in few-shot learning. Its design idea is to
use a single prototype to represent one class, where the single
prototype is calculated by averaging the embedding vectors
within the same class space. Prototype learning has received
signiﬁcant progress in various tasks, such as image classi-
ﬁcation [48], video processing [49], and natural language
processing [50] areas. In image classiﬁcation tasks [48], a class
is represented as a single prototype by computing the mean
of the feature vectors of that class. In video processing [49],
prototypes are obtained by calculating the average feature
over different timestamps. In natural language processing
tasks [50], taking the average of word embeddings can yield a
prototype representation for a sentence. Further, both few-shot
learning and FL are based on the scenario of training with
a small amount of data: the clients do not have enough data
to train their own models. Recently, there have been various
successful works using prototypes for federated optimization
in computer vision tasks. In FedProto, Tan et al. [19] proposed
to reduce communication overhead by only exchanging pro-
totypes between clients and the server instead of exchanging
gradients or model parameters. However, their work does
not validate in a more general heterogeneous environment
setting, such as Dirichlet distribution [21]. An optimized
prototype-based FL is proposed in [51] by using margins
of
prototypical
representations
learned
from
distributed
heterogeneous data to calculate the deviations of clients and
applying these deviations through an attention mechanism to
boost model performance. FedProc [26] introduces that global
prototypes in the server can be used as a guideline to correct
clients’ training in local updates, and they use a contrastive
loss to pull each class to be close to the corresponding global
prototypes while pushing away from other global prototypes.
FedPCL [27] proposes a strategy based on contrastive learn-
ing that uses single prototype exchange instead of gradient
communication for efﬁcient communication. MOON [52]
is designed based on model-level contrastive learning by
comparing the representations between the global model
and local models. However, most of them focus on each
client’s individual learning process while disregarding the
collaborative contributions from other clients. Moreover, most
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8608
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Fig. 2.
Two strategies for model inference: the single prototype-based
(left) and multiprototype-based (right) approaches. In the diagram, black solid
circles represent prototypes, while white solid circles represent query classes.
of the above-mentioned works adopt to represent the same
class using a single prototype, which may fail to capture
discriminative embedding representations by naively taking
the mean of the feature space [53], [54].
Therefore, different from the single prototype learning
paradigm used in these works, we propose to use multiple
prototypes to represent each class and adopt multiprototype-
based contrastive learning to capture intraclass differences and
interclass similarities. Here, we brieﬂy describe the core part
of the model inference process in the single-prototype-based
approach and our proposed multiprototype-based approach, as
shown in Fig. 2. Taking the multiprototype strategy, as illus-
trated in the right subﬁgure of Fig. 2, as an example, the
model inference stage involves two main processes: 1) dis-
tance calculation and 2) decision making. When a query
class is introduced to the network during inference, these
two processes are executed to determine the most appropriate
prototype for the query class.
1) The network calculates distances between the new query
class and the multiple prototypes associated with each
existing class in the class space. These prototypes rep-
resent the diverse representations learned from different
clients during the FL process.
2) The classiﬁcation decision for the new query class is
made based on the shortest distance to any of the
prototypes of that speciﬁc class.
The network assigns the new query class to the class whose
prototype exhibits the closest similarity in the embedding
space. Note that the multiprototype concept used in the model
inference strategy is also used in our contrastive learning-
based model training process. However, the training process
differs from the multiprototype-based model inference pro-
cess. During the contrastive learning-based model training, the
objective is to optimize the query to be as close as possi-
ble to multiple prototypes belonging to the same class space
while simultaneously ensuring that it remains far away from
all other prototypes belonging to class spaces different from
its own. The contrastive learning technique aims to enhance
the discriminative power of the model by encouraging similar
representations for data points belonging to the same class and
pushing apart those from different classes. This way, the model
learns to create well-separated and informative embeddings for
each class, which in turn is expected to beneﬁt the subsequent
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF NOTATIONS
inference process. The details of the multiprototype calculation
and multiprototype-based model training and inference will
be illustrated in the following sections. Table I presents a
summary of the notations used in this manuscript.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the key elements behind
FL, including the system model in Section III-A and the
local training optimization algorithm for local training in
Section III-B. Then, our optimization problem is formulated
in Section III-C.
A. Federated Learning Model
The essence of the FL strategy is to train a model through
the collaboration of distributed clients based on their local
data, which serves the purpose of protecting data privacy. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8609
Fig. 3.
Overview of federated training framework. In the beginning of each
global round, the server ﬁrst sends the global model to clients (step 1). Each
local client then performs local training based on its own training data (step
2). Next, after the local training is ﬁnished, each client send the updated
model parameters to the server for aggregation (step 3). Finally, the model
parameters are averaged at the server (step 4).
overview of the FL framework is shown in Fig. 3. The training
process can be summarized as follows.
The typical process of FL is based on the setting where
each client i has a heterogeneous and privacy-sensitive data
set, denoted by Di = (xi, yi), of size Di, where xi and yi
represent the feature space and corresponding label of the ith
client, respectively. The goal is to coordinate the collaboration
between clients and the edge server to train a shared model
F(ω; xi) for each client. The empirical risk (e.g., cross-entropy
loss) of the client i with one-hot encoded labels can be deﬁned
as follows [26]:
fi(ω) = −
C

j=1
1y=j log pj(F(ω; xi); yi)
(1)
where 1(·) is the indicator function, ω is the shared model
parameters of global model, C is the number of classes belong-
ing to label space [C] = {1, . . . , C}, and pj(F(ω; xi); yi)
denotes the probability of data sample (xi, yi) being classi-
ﬁed as the jth class. In addition, the local training of each
client is to minimize the local loss Li as follows:
Li(ω) = 1
Di

i∈Di
fi(ω).
(2)
The global objective is to minimize the loss function across
heterogeneous clients as follows:
arg min
ω
L(ω) =

i∈[N]
Di

i∈[N] Di
Li(ω)
(3)
where
[N]
denotes
the
set
of
distributed
clients
with
[N] = {1, . . . , N}.
B. SGD Optimization
As the ﬁrst FL optimization algorithm, FedAvg requires
multiple global iterations during the training process. Most
subsequent works [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] follow
this training framework, including our work. In each global
iteration process, each selected client participates in train-
ing and performs local stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to
optimize its local objective
ωt+1 = ωt −η∇Li(ωt)
(4)
where η is the learning rate, ∇Li(•) is the loss gradient of
client i, and ωt is the updated result of the global model in
the previous round.
C. Problem Formulation
The system model is shown in Fig. 4, and the illustra-
tion of the transmission of model parameters between clients
and the edge server is omitted for simplicity. In each global
iteration, the server needs to not only receive model parame-
ters from clients and perform model parameters averaging but
also receive prototype knowledge from clients and aggregate
them (the strategy for prototype aggregation will be explained
in Section IV-B). Finally, the aggregated model parameters and
global prototype pool are returned to local clients participating
in the training, while the next iteration begins until conver-
gence. In summary, during the model training phase, clients
i and j with heterogeneous data sets Di and Dj, respectively,
need to simultaneously transmit their own model parameters
and their own prototypes based on the features extracted from
the feature extraction layers (a.k.a the encoder) to be used in
the next global round. Note that the prototypes are the out-
put after clustering, rather than directly averaging the output
of the feature extractor layers. The MLP includes the fully
connected (FC) layers and a decision-making layer (a.k.a the
classiﬁer). In order to extract better features, the former can
be an ordinary convolutional layer or a pretrained network,
and the latter is used to map the output of the former from
one latent space to another for further representation learning.
Each client aims to minimize the typical supervised learn-
ing loss LS, while also minimizing the distance between their
local representations and the global prototype pool for sam-
ples belonging to the same class space, and maximizing the
distance for samples not belonging to the same class space.
This can be denoted as LR. During the model inference stage,
the clients can use their individual updated local representa-
tions to compare with the updated global prototype pool for
model inference. We have marked these entities in the system
model and given the basic prototype calculation process.
Speciﬁcally, motivated by prototype learning in FL and the
observation in their works [53], [54], the goal of this article
is ﬁrst to learn multiprototype representations for each class
space through the federated training process, and then perform
the ﬁnal model inference based on these prototypes. Formally
arg min
j
∥c −ui∥,
ui ∈Uj,
j ∈[C]
(5)
where c is a local representation of one client, Uj is deﬁned
to aggregate the multiple prototypes for each client belong-
ing to jth class, and ui denotes one instance in corresponding
aggregated global prototype set Uj. Finally, the prediction can
be made by measuring the distance between one local repre-
sentation c and each aggregated prototypes set Uj and then
choosing the jth label with the smallest distance as the ﬁnal
prediction.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8610
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Fig. 4.
Overview of the proposed multiprototype-based FL framework (here illustrated with K = 2 prototypes). In each global round, clients not only transmit
their model parameters but also the calculated multiple prototypes by k-means to the server for aggregation. The aggregated prototypes set (the aggregated
prototypes set is also called the global prototype pool) is then sent back to each client along with updated model parameters for the next global iteration.
Finally, the clients update their local models by minimizing the loss of typical supervised learning loss Ls and the distance between the global prototype pool
and local representations LR in a contrastive way, repeating the above process until convergence.
IV. MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED LEARNING
In
this
section,
we
design
an
MP-FedCL
algorithm
to
improve
the
performance
of
federated
training.
In
Section IV-A, we give the method for calculating multiple
prototypes, which is used to compute multiple prototypes in
the embedding space for each class based on k-means clus-
tering, thus obtaining a relatively full representation for each
class. Then, a strategy for multiple prototypes aggregation is
proposed in Section IV-B to collect all class-related knowledge
shared by all clients. The objective function of the proposed
algorithm is presented in Section IV-C. During the model infer-
ence stage, predictions are made based on the distance from
the prototypes rather than through a classiﬁer in Section IV-D.
A. Multiprototype Calculation
The feature extraction layer and the decision-making layer
in the MLP are usually two core parts of the deep learn-
ing model. The former is mainly used to extract feature
information from the input space, and the latter makes the ﬁnal
prediction decision based on the learned feature information.
For any client i, we denote its feature extraction layers and the
MLP as fe(ωe; xi) and fc(ωc; xi), then the embedding space of
its jth class instance can be calculated as
vi,j =

fe(ωe; xi) | xi ∈Di,j

(6)
where Di,j is a set of Di that belongs to the jth class, and vi,j
is the embedding space of jth class.
In order to calculate multiple prototypes for each class,
we iteratively cluster vi,j into k clusters based on k-means
algorithm, which is an effective unsupervised algorithm for
clustering and has been proven to converge to at least a local
optimum after a small number of iterations [55]. Based on
the standard iteration of k-means, similarly we also randomly
select the k centroids in the ﬁrst iteration. We then calculate
the centroid to which each sample in Di,j should belong to,
and repeat this process until the centroid does not change or
changes only slightly. The multiple prototypes used in our
method are deﬁned as centroids obtained through k-means
clustering. Speciﬁcally, we apply k-means clustering to the
embeddings of each class, and each resulting centroid is con-
sidered a prototype for that class in the embedding space.
Thus, multiple prototypes of class j can be deﬁned as follows:
uk
i,j = Clustering

vi,j

,
k ∈{1, . . . , K}
(7)
where K is the number of clusters, the output of Clustering(·)
for the ith client of the jth class is denoted as
ui,j where
ui,j = {uk
i,j | k ∈{1, . . . , K}}. Note that because our clustering
algorithm is executed on the client side, we need to communi-
cate prototypes with the server, but compared to the complete
model parameters, the additional communication cost of proto-
type communication is very small [19], [56], [57]. The model
parameters and the corresponding multiprototypes, and their
ratios are shown in Table II. The Ratio in Table II is deﬁned
as the proportion of multiprototype to corresponding model
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8611
TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN MODEL PARAMETERS AND CORRESPONDING
MULTIPROTOTYPE ON VARIOUS DATA SETS
parameters, and its result indicates that multiprototype com-
munication accounts for only a small fraction (less than 0.1)
of model parameters. Note that the model architecture and the
selection of K for multiprototype are discussed in detail in
Section V.
B. Multiprototype Aggregation
The goal of multiprototype learning is to reduce the dis-
tance of embedding space between local prototypes and the
corresponding prototypes from the global prototype pool. After
receiving the clustering results as computed in (7), the server
groups these prototypes (also denotes k centroids) by class as
a global prototype pool. This pool is denoted as U = {U1,
U2, . . . , UC}, where each group contains prototypes from the
same class but from different clients. Formally
Uj =

uk
i,j | i ∈[N]
	
, k ∈{1, . . . , K}
(8)
where Uj denotes the set of clients that own multiple proto-
types of class j. Through this aggregation mechanism,
the
prototypes are grouped according to their respective class
labels. The resulting global pool summarizes all class-related
knowledge shared by all clients, allowing us to effectively
utilize information from various clients while maintaining
classwise separation.
After the aggregation process, the server sends back the
global prototype pool to local clients, which is used to guide
their local training in the next global round. However, some
clients’ classes may be missing [26], [58], [59] or underrepre-
sented (i.e., classes with very few samples) [60], [61], [62]. In
such cases, the global prototype pool can be utilized to ﬁll in
the missing classes and ensure that prototypes for all classes
have the same number of prototypes for the learning process.
Here, inspired by the single prototype padding approach used
in various tasks [27], [63], [64], we introduce a multiprototype-
based padding procedure to achieve a balanced representation
of all class prototypes per client. By introducing this prototype
padding process, each client is guaranteed to have a consis-
tent and balanced set of prototypes for all classes, regardless of
their respective data distribution. Speciﬁcally, for the averag-
ing process, the prototypes from different clients are matched
based on their respective class labels, which means that proto-
types belonging to the same class but originating from different
clients are grouped together. Next, we perform the averaging
of prototypes by summing up all the prototypes belonging to a
particular group and then dividing the sum by the total number
of prototypes in that group. Formally
Uj = 1
Ni
Ni

i=1
ui, ui ∈Uj
(9)
where Uj represents the averaged value belonging to global
prototype set Uj, Ni denotes the number of instance belonging
to Uj.
Subsequently, we implement the prototype padding proce-
dure to ensure that each client has a consistent and balanced
set of K prototypes for every class, which can be formulated
as follows:
∀k ∈{1, . . . , K},
uk
i,j =

Uj, if |ui,j| < K
uk
i,j, if |ui,j| = K
(10)
where |ui,j| is the number of ui,j for class j of ith client. We tra-
verse all K possible prototypes uk
i,j for class j of the ith client.
For each k, we check the number of prototypes |ui,j| currently
available for class j of the ith client. If |ui,j| is less than K, we
apply prototype padding by replacing uk
i,j with the averaged
prototype Uj. This ensures that each client has K prototypes
for each class, even in cases where some prototypes might be
missing or underrepresented. On the other hand, if |ui,j| equals
K, it indicates that the client already has the required number
of prototypes for class j, and no padding is needed. In this
case, we keep the kth prototype uk
i,j unchanged.
C. Objective Function
As shown in Fig. 4, our proposed network architecture con-
sists of two loss functions. The ﬁrst one, LS, is the loss
of typical supervised learning tasks, which can be computed
using (3). The second one, LR, is our proposed supervised
contrastive loss term. After receiving the global prototype pool
from the server, the objective of local clients, LR, is to align
their local representations with the corresponding prototype
in the global prototype pool, while simultaneously pushing
away dissimilar prototypes from themselves. As such, each
client can beneﬁt from other clients. We deﬁne the supervised
contrastive loss [65] as
LR =

i∈Di
−1
KN
N

i=1
K

k=1
1
|P(y)|

p∈P(y)
log
exp

vi • uk
p/τ


a∈[C] exp

vi • uka/τ

(11)
where the
• symbol denotes the inner (dot) product, τ is a
scalar temperature hyperparameter (the smaller the tempera-
ture coefﬁcient, the more focused it is on difﬁcult samples.),
vi represents the local embedding of client i, P(y) is the set
of labels distinct from y and the size of P(y) is |P(y)|, and k
denotes one element in a certain global prototype set and the
size of one set is K.
Therefore, the global objective for the network can be
formulated as
L(ωi | Di) = LS(F(ωi; xi); yi) + LR.
(12)
A more detailed model training pseudocode for MP-FedCL is
shown in Algorithm 1. The inputs of this algorithm are het-
erogeneous data sets and some training parameters. After the
network is initialized, the federated training process is per-
formed from lines 3–20. The multiple prototypes calculation
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8612
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Algorithm 1 MP-FedCL for Federated Training
Input:
Dataset Di(xi, yi) of each client, learning rate η,
Number of local clients N, number of local epoch E,
Number of global communication rounds T,
Number of clusters k.
Edge server executes:
1: Initialize ω0
2: Initialize global prototype set U for all classes
3: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
4:
for i = 0, 1, . . . , N in parallel do
5:
Send global model ωt and global prototype set U to
client i
6:
ωt
i, uk
i,j ←LocalUpdate(ωt
i, U)
7:
U ←{{uk
i,j | i ∈[N], j ∈[C]}, k ∈{1, . . . , K}}
8:
end for
9:
ωt+1 ←N
i=1
|Di|
|D| ωt
i
10: end for
LocalUpdate(ωt
i, U):
11: for each local epoch do
12:
for each batch (xi; yi) of Di do
13:
vi,j ←fei(ωt
ei; xi)
14:
LS ←CrossEntropyLoss(F(ωi; xi); yi)).
15:
Calculate LR according to Eq. (11)
16:
ωt
i ←ωt
i −η∇(LS + LR)
17:
end for
18: end for
19: uk
i,j ←Clustering(vi,j)
20: return ωt
i, uk
i,j
and aggregation are dealt with in lines 19 and 7, respectively.
In each global round, the local representations for each client
are calculated in line 13. The supervised learning task for them
is computed in line 14, and the regularization term is calcu-
lated in line 15. After the SGD in the local clients has been
performed in line 16, each client then sends their own updated
model parameters and calculated multiple prototypes in line 20
back to the server for model parameters aggregation in line 9
and multiple prototypes aggregation in line 7, repeating the
above iteration process for T rounds until convergence.
D. Model Inference
Based on the ﬁndings of the survey in [66], it is revealed
that the lower test accuracy of models in FL environ-
ments can be attributed primarily to the later layers of the
model. Speciﬁcally, the classiﬁer’s predictions have the great-
est impact on the model’s accuracy. As a result of this ﬁnding,
we propose an innovative approach that utilizes the output
before the decision-making layer in the model for making
predictions instead of relying solely on the classiﬁer. This new
approach can be expressed mathematically as a reformulation
of (5)
ˆy = arg min
j
∥fe(ωe; x) −ui∥,
ui ∈Uj
(13)
where ˆy is the predicted label, fe(ωe; x) is the output of feature
extraction layers (this symbol is originally denoted as c in (5),
Algorithm 2 MP-FedCL for Model Inference
Input: Test dataset of each client
1: for each sample i in testing dataset do
2:
for each class j in U do
3:
for each instance k in class j do
4:
Compute the ℓ2 distance between fe(ωe; xi)
and each instance in Uj
5:
end for
6:
Choose the smallest distance as a candidate-predicted
label for class j according to Eq. (13)
7:
end for
8:
Collect all candidate-predicted labels
9:
Make ﬁnal predictions based on the smallest candidate
prediction label
10: end for
i.e., the output of feature extraction layers is represented as the
local representation), and ∥• ∥denotes the ℓ2-norm of a vec-
tor. The prediction can be made by measuring the ℓ2 distance
between the local representation fe(ωe; x) and the aggregated
prototypes set Uj of jth class. A more detailed model infer-
ence pseudocode for MP-FedCL is shown in Algorithm 2.
For each client, each sample in its test data set ﬁrst calculates
the distance to each instance of an aggregated global proto-
type set in line 4 and then chooses the smallest distance as
a candidate-predicted label in line 6. Later, all the candidate-
predicted labels are collected in line 8. Finally, the prediction
can be made based on the smallest candidate-predicted label in
line 9. We also provide a convergence analysis of MP-FedCL
in Appendix-A.
E. Complexity Analysis
Since Algorithm 1 in MP-FedCL involves many similar
global iterations, we analyze the time complexity of only
one such iteration for simplicity. In Algorithm 1, each global
iteration mainly consists of the following steps: 1) communica-
tion round; 2) local model training; and 3) k-means clustering.
The algorithm executes a total of T global communication
rounds. In each round, the global model ωt and the global
prototype set U are sent to each of the N clients in parallel.
Therefore, the time complexity for each round can be consid-
ered as O(1). For the local model training process, each client
performs local updates for a ﬁxed number of local epochs E.
For the convenience of analysis, let us consider a FC neural
network where each layer has the same number of param-
eters, denoted as M. Without loss of generality, we assume
that the data samples of each client are the same D, given
that the batch size is expressed as B, the total number of
iterations required to complete one local iteration is D/B. In
addition, since the computation in each layer can be viewed as
a matrix-vector multiplication (note that the matrix calculation
mainly involves weight parameters, we ignore bias parameters
calculation for simplicity), the time complexity for forward
propagation of the FC network in local model training can
be expressed as O(E · D/B · Llayer · M2), where Llayer repre-
sents the number of layers in the FC network. Overall, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8613
TABLE III
MODEL ARCHITECTURE FOR MNIST
time complexity for forward propagation can be simpliﬁed
as O(DM2); here, certain variables E, B, and Llayer can be
considered as constants since E, B, and Llayer ≪M hold typi-
cally. Therefore, the time complexity for local model training
is O(DM2 +DM3), where the time complexity for back prop-
agation is O(DM3). After local model training, each client
performs k-means clustering to update its embedding space
vi,j for each class. The time complexity for k-means algorithm
is typically O(E ·I ·K ·D·C ·M), where E denotes the number
of local epochs, I is the number of iterations, K is the number
of clusters, D is the number of data points, C is the number
of classes, and M is the dimensionality of the output before
the decision-making layer (here, the output is M because it
is assumed that parameters of each layer are M). Similarly,
certain variables like E, I, K, and C can be considered as con-
stants since E, I, K, C ≪M, then the time complexity for
the proposed multiprototype calculation can be simpliﬁed to
O(DM). Compared with local model training, the time com-
plexity for multiprototype calculation is relatively low. For
Algorithm 2, after the embedding space is calculated, for a
certain test sample, the time complexity for model inference
is O(K · C). We assume the number of test samples for each
client is D′, then the total time complexity for model infer-
ence is linear as O(D′) since K and C can be considered as
constants.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We now present the experimental results of the proposed
multiprototype-based FL strategy. We implement MP-FedCL
on different data sets, and models and compare with the
most commonly used baselines, including Local, FedAvg [6],
FedProx [9], and FedProto [19]. We ﬁrst introduce the data
sets and local models in Section V-A. Then, the implementa-
tion details are provided in Section V-B. The selection of K for
different data sets is discussed in Section V-C. In Section V-D,
the test accuracy of different baselines under different data
sets with different non-IID settings is illustrated. The robust-
ness and communication efﬁciency comparison are shown in
Sections V-E and V-F, respectively.
A. Data Sets and Local Models
We conduct experiments on four popular benchmark data
sets: 1) MNIST [67]; 2) Digit-5 [68]; 3) Ofﬁce-10 [69]; and
4) DomainNet [70] to verify the potential beneﬁts of multiple-
prototype-based FL for edge network intelligence. MNIST is
the handwritten digit recognition data set. It contains 10 dif-
ferent classes with 60 000 training samples and 10 000 test
samples. Digit-5 is a collection of images of handwritten digits
from the ﬁve most popular data sets, including SVHN, USPS,
MNIST, MNIST-M, and SynthDigits. Ofﬁce-10 consists of
images from four different ofﬁce environments, each contain-
ing a distinct set of classes: 1) Amazon (A); 2) Webcam (W);
3) DSLR (D); and 4) Caltech (C). DomainNet is a large-scale,
multidomain image classiﬁcation data set. It consists of over
600 000 images from 345 categories, divided into six domains:
1) clipart; 2) infograph; 3) painting; 4) quickdraw; 5) real; and
6) sketch. Each domain contains a distinct set of classes and
has its own characteristics and challenges.
For local models, a 2-layer encoder network with two FC
layers and an MLP with two FC layers are considered for
MNIST, as shown in Table III. For these data sets that are
more complex than MNIST, such as Digit-5, Ofﬁce-10, and
DomainNet, we use ResNet18 [71], which has been pre-
trained on DomainNet, as the encoder. Please refer to their
work [72] for more details about the pretrained model. We
employ the same MLP architecture as in MNIST for these
data sets. The output dimension of the encoder and the input
of the decision-making layer of the MLP network are 512
and 256, respectively. Note that for fair comparisons, all
baselines adopt the same network architecture as MP-FedCL,
including MLP.
B. Implementation Details
We investigate two different non-IID settings to mimic non-
IID scenarios:
1) Feature Distribution Skew: Clients have the same label
distributions but different feature distributions;
2) Label Distribution Skew: Clients have different label
distributions but the same feature distribution, which is
simulated by Dirichlet distribution Dir(α) [21].
Here, the more skewness among clients is, the smaller the
value α is, and vice versa. The label distribution skewness
α is set to 0.05 for all federated training algorithms unless
explicitly speciﬁed.
We compare our proposed method with popular FL algo-
rithms, including Local, where local models are updated in
each global round without any communication with others,
FedAvg [6], FedProto [19], and FedProx [9]. We use 5, 4,
and 6 clients for Digit-5, Ofﬁce-10, and DomainNet in the
feature distribution skewed setting, respectively. In the label
distribution skewed setting, the number of clients for Digit-
5, Ofﬁce-10, and DomainNet is all 5. We use ﬁve clients for
MNIST unless explicitly speciﬁed. The size of MNIST for all
experiments is 2000 for simplicity. The visualization results of
all data sets with label non-IID and feature non-IID settings
are shown in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively.
We use PyTorch [73] to implement all the baselines.
Following [9] and [27], the grid search is used to select the
optimal hyperparameters for model training. Speciﬁcally, we
use the SGD optimizer for all baselines, and the SGD momen-
tum is set to 0.5. The other training parameters are set to be
B = 32, E = 1, τ = 0.07, η = 0.01 with decay rate =
0.95, which denotes local batch size, local epochs, temper-
ature, learning rate, and learning rate decay per iteration,
respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8614
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Fig. 5.
Illustration of the label non-IID setting on (a) MNIST, (b) Digit-5, (c) Ofﬁce-10, and (d) DomainNet data sets. The same color represents the same
client, and each client samples from their respective data set according to Dir(0.05). The sampling results have the same feature distribution but different label
distribution.
Fig. 6.
Illustration of the feature non-IID setting on (a) Digit-5, (b) Ofﬁce-10, and (c) DomainNet data sets. The different color represents clients with
different data sets, and the visualization result shows that each client shares the same label distribution but has different feature distribution.
Fig. 7.
Average test accuracy (%) under the label distribution skew with
Dir(0.05) on four baseline data sets with K ranging from 2 to 4.
C. Choosing K
The selection of K is performed in the feature space of
samples in different data sets. Intuitively, the feature space
of samples from different data sets is different; thus the
number of K is associated with speciﬁc data sets. Here,
we adopt a similar way as [30] to maintain a uniform
value for K across classes for simplicity, although this value
may vary for different classes. Note that since we focus
on the ﬁxed-prototype strategy in this article, we initially
explore a dynamic prototype-based scheme for completeness.
Speciﬁcally, we study the effect of different K ∈{2, 3, 4}
under label distribution skew through heuristic selection and
then apply the most appropriate K value to all experiments
under different non-IID settings. Similar heuristic selection
method applied in the feature space has been utilized in
many papers [16], [31], [74]. We run three trials with dif-
ferent random seeds and report the average test accuracy
on validation data sets, as shown in Fig. 7. The number of
communication rounds is set to 60 for all data sets. It can
be found that the appropriate K values for MNIST, Digit-5,
Ofﬁce-10, and DomainNet are 2, 4, 4, and 3, respectively. The
hyperparameters used are presented in Table IV.
D. Accuracy Comparison
In this section, given that the number of K may vary across
different classes, we attempt to explore another feature cluster-
ing method for feature clustering, called density-based spatial
clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) [75], which
is different from k-means as it does not require specifying
the number of clusters beforehand. It automatically deter-
mines the number of clusters based on the data’s density and
has been applied in the image ﬁeld [76], [77], [78], [79],
[80]. Here, we combine the DBSCAN clustering method with
our proposal that each client uses DBSCAN for clustering
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8615
TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS
TABLE V
TOP-1 AVERAGE TEST ACCURACY (%) OF MP-FEDCL AND OTHER
BASELINES ON DIGIT-5 UNDER Feature Non-IID SETTING
TABLE VI
TOP-1 AVERAGE TEST ACCURACY (%) OF MP-FEDCL AND OTHER
BASELINES ON VARIOUS DATA SETS UNDER Label Non-IID SETTING
instead of k-means, terming it DP-FedCL, and compare it with
MP-FedCL and other baselines.
Speciﬁcally, we compare our method with the baselines
under the feature non-IID and label non-IID settings where
feature non-IID means the feature distribution is skewed while
the label distribution is IID, and label non-IID means the label
distribution is skewed while the feature distribution is IID. For
the sake of fair comparison, we conduct experiments with the
same hyperparameters, run three trials, and report the mean
and standard derivation. The best results are shown in bold.
Table V reports the average test accuracies of our method
and baselines in the mean(std) format under the feature
non-IID setting. The results indicate that MP-FedCL achieves
higher test accuracy and smaller standard deviation compared
to most cases, with an improvement of approximately 4.6%
over the second-highest test accuracy. In addition, Table VI
presents our results and those of the baselines under the label
non-IID setting. In this setting, we use SP-FedCL, which refers
to our training strategy that employs a single prototype (i.e.,
K = 1). Speciﬁcally, we do not use any clustering algorithm
in (7), but instead take the mean value of the feature space
belonging to the same label as the prototype of the label, which
is also known as a single prototype. The results show that our
method enjoys relatively signiﬁcant advantages over almost all
other baselines, and about at least 10.4% improvement in test
accuracy compared to most cases. Moreover, since the cost of
communication has been considered to be the bottleneck of
FL, we also report the number of communication rounds for
each algorithm in Table VI accordingly. It can be seen that
our proposal and other methods based on our strategy only
need relatively few communication rounds compared to oth-
ers. For DP-FedCL, the only difference from MP-FedCL is
that it dynamically selects the number of clusters using the
DBSCAN algorithm on each local client. The results indi-
cate that clustering using k-means and assigning an equal
number of prototypes to each class outperforms the adopted
dynamic selection approach. We conjecture that while dynam-
ically selecting the number of clusters might lead to varying
prototype assignments for each class, it can also introduce an
imbalance in class representations, resulting in biased model
learning.
E. Robustness Comparison
Different Degrees of Label Non-IID: Considering that label-
ing non-IID is a common challenge in FL, designing an
algorithm that is robust to various heterogeneous data is crucial
for deploying the FL algorithm in real applications. Therefore,
we compare our method with several baselines under different
levels of label heterogeneity to verify the robustness of differ-
ent algorithms to data heterogeneity. As shown in Fig. 8, the
α decreases from 1.0 to 0.1, controlling the degree of label
heterogeneity, which means that labels are distributed more
and more heterogeneously among clients. We report the aver-
age test accuracy for Digit-5 under different heterogeneities in
Fig. 8(a). Note that since our proposal requires only a small
number of iterations, therefore the number of communication
rounds for MP-FedCL and SP-FedCL is set to 60, and 100
for others. The results show that our proposal outperforms all
approaches under different heterogeneous settings in terms of
test accuracy, and enjoys a relatively small deviation compared
to those in most cases.
Speciﬁcally, in comparison to the performance under all
heterogeneity settings, our method achieves at least an 8.8%
and 2.0% increase in accuracy compared to the popular
baseline FedAvg and state-of-the-art FedProto, respectively.
To highlight the advantage of multiprototype learning over
single-prototype learning, we conduct experiments using the
same learning strategy as the former, but with only a sin-
gle prototype, which we refer to as SP-FedCL. The results
show that our method consistently outperforms SP-FedCL by
approximately 2.0% in average test accuracy across various
scenarios. These results underscore the effectiveness of our
multiprototype learning approach in FL, leading to improved
robustness compared to both single-prototype and state-of-
the-art methods. Interestingly, in some scenarios (such as
α = 0.1), the performance of FedAvg is lower than that of
Local, which shows that FedAvg does not always perform
well in dealing with heterogeneous scenarios. It would be an
intriguing research direction to explore the synergies between
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8616
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Fig. 8.
Illustration of the average test accuracy (%) on (a) Digit-5 and
(b) Ofﬁce-10 under different levels of label non-IID settings.
local optimization and federated optimization, allowing us to
harness the advantages offered by both approaches.
Additionally, in Fig. 8(b), we present similar results for
Ofﬁce-10 under various degrees of heterogeneity. The ﬁnd-
ings further demonstrate that, in the majority of cases, our
proposed method outperforms all other approaches in terms of
test accuracy, highlighting its advantage in dealing with data
heterogeneity. Speciﬁcally, compared to SP-FedCL, FedProto,
and FedAvg, our method shows improvements of at least 0.3%,
1.4%, and 7.5%, respectively, across different label non-IID
settings. However, it is worth noting that almost all meth-
ods, including ours, encounter signiﬁcant deviations under
extremely heterogeneous settings like Dir(0.1) and Dir(0.2).
This can be attributed to the relatively limited number of train-
ing samples available in Ofﬁce-10 compared to Digit-5, which
may lead to higher ﬂuctuations in performance. Moreover, it
should be noted that similar results are observed in this setting,
with FedAvg performing worse than Local in most cases.
Different Numbers of Clients: In addition to exploring the
robustness of our proposed algorithm to different levels of
data heterogeneity, we also aim to investigate its robustness
Fig. 9.
Illustration of the average test accuracy (%) on (a) MNIST and
(b) Digit-5 based on Dir(0.1) with the varying numbers of clients.
to varying numbers of participating clients in the FL set-
ting. As depicted in Fig. 9, we demonstrate the robustness
of our proposed method by evaluating its performance across
an increasing number of clients, ranging from 5 to 40, with
labels distribution following Dir(0.1). The average test accu-
racy for MNIST and Digit-5 under the various number of
clients is shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), respectively. The illustra-
tion demonstrates that our proposed method exhibits a distinct
advantage over FedAvg in terms of test accuracy across dif-
ferent numbers of clients. Moreover, our approach maintains a
relatively small deviation compared to FedAvg in most cases,
further highlighting its robustness against various numbers of
clients.
Speciﬁcally, regarding the results of MNIST displayed in
Fig. 9(a), our proposed method achieves a remarkable increase
of at least 7.2% in test accuracy compared to the baseline
FedAvg when varying the number of clients. It is interesting to
note that, compared to both FedAvg and MP-FedCL, FedProto
exhibits inferior performance across all numbers of participat-
ing clients. Moreover, the performance of FedProto decreases
as the number of clients increases, and its peak performance
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
QIAO et al.: MP-FedCL: MULTIPROTOTYPE FEDERATED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR EDGE INTELLIGENCE
8617
TABLE VII
TOP-1 AVERAGE TEST ACCURACY (%) OF MP-FEDCL AND OTHER
BASELINES ON DIGIT-5 AND OFFICE-10 UNDER Label Non-IID WITH
DIR(0.5) AND Feature Non-IID
is only about half of that of MP-FedCL. This observation
strongly suggests that the approach of not transmitting the
model parameters, as adopted in FedProto, may not be suit-
able for models trained from scratch. Similarly, in the case of
Digit-5, as shown in Fig. 9(b), our proposal consistently out-
performs both FedAvg and FedProto in terms of test accuracy
across different numbers of clients. To be precise, our method
demonstrates an improvement of at least 18.73% and 10.99%
compared to FedAvg and FedProto, respectively. Furthermore,
it is worthwhile to mention that our proposed method exhibits
lower accuracy variance compared to the other methods in the
majority of cases, whereas FedAvg experiences higher ﬂuc-
tuations. This observation could be attributed to the inherent
complexity of the feature space in Digit-5, which is likely
more intricate compared to the MNIST data set. Consequently,
the variations between clients in Digit-5 become more pro-
nounced, leading to the observed differences in performance
for FedAvg. In contrast, prototype-based schemes, such as
FedProto and MP-FedCL, show more robust results (in terms
of accuracy variation) across different numbers of participat-
ing clients in the FL setting. This indicates that an approach
based on prototypes successfully handles heterogeneity to a
certain extent.
F. Communication Efﬁciency Comparison
As FL involves training models across distributed clients,
ensuring a fast and efﬁcient convergence rate is of great impor-
tance. A faster convergence rate implies that the participating
clients can converge to the optimal with higher accuracy in
fewer communication rounds, reducing the overall communi-
cation and computational overhead. Therefore, in this section,
we evaluate the convergence rate of our proposal and conduct
a comprehensive investigation with other benchmarks.
Table VII presents the top-1 average test accuracy (%)
of different methods, including Local, FedAvg, FedProto,
DP-FedCL, SP-FedCL, and MP-FedCL, on two data sets:
1) Digit-5 and 2) Ofﬁce-10 and the corresponding communica-
tion rounds. The evaluation is performed under the condition
of label non-IID with Dir(0.5) and feature non-IID. From the
results in Table VII, we observe that MP-FedCL consistently
achieves the highest top-1 average test accuracy and fewer
TABLE VIII
TOP-1 AVERAGE TEST ACCURACY (%) OF MP-FEDCL AND OTHER
BASELINES ON DIGIT-5 AND OFFICE-10 UNDER Label Non-IID WITH
DIR(0.5) AND Feature Non-IID
communication rounds compared to other methods in most
cases. Speciﬁcally, Local achieves the lowest accuracy since
it does not participate in FL rounds (0 communication rounds).
The methods based on federated training, such as FedAvg and
FedProto, have shown improved performance, but they require
a high number of communication rounds (130 communica-
tion rounds). In contrast, MP-FedCL consistently outperforms
the other federated methods in most cases and only requires
about half the number of communication rounds (60 com-
munication rounds) of FedAvg, showcasing its capability to
learn from distributed data efﬁciently. In other words, achiev-
ing similar performance to the baselines MP-FedCL requires
fewer computational resources. Moreover, we observe a sim-
ilar phenomenon as in Table VI that DP-FedCL is still lower
than the single-prototype scheme and our proposal in this set-
ting. However, it is worthwhile to note that other schemes for
dynamically selecting prototypes may potentially outperform
our current approach, which leaves for our future work.
Table VIII shows the top-1 average test accuracy of
MP-FedCL and other baselines on Digit-5 and Ofﬁce-10
under label non-IID with Dir(0.5) and feature non-IID. All
algorithms are compared under similar training times. The
results show that MP-FedCL achieves comparable or supe-
rior performance compared to baselines. In other words,
MP-FedCL can still achieve competitive performance under
approximately the same computational resources. In addi-
tion, we compare the average test accuracy of our proposed
MP-FedCL with FedProto and SP-FedCL per global round
during training based on different kinds of heterogeneous
settings (including feature non-IID and label non-IID) after
several runs with different random seeds, as shown in Fig. 10.
Both subﬁgures demonstrate that our method outperforms
them in terms of test accuracy and communication efﬁciency.
Speciﬁcally, we evaluate our proposal with FedProto and
SP-FedCL on Digit-5 under label non-IID with Dir(1.0). It
shows that our method outperforms theirs by approximately
2.74% and 1.40% in test accuracy, respectively, and also
leads them the way in convergence rate. Similar results are
available in Fig. 10(b), which is the test accuracy of Ofﬁce-
10 with feature non-IID. It demonstrates that our proposal
still outperforms theirs by 3.47% and 4.92% in terms of
test accuracy, and they lag behind us by a signiﬁcant mar-
gin in terms of convergence rate. This indicates the potential
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8618
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 1 MARCH 2024
Fig. 10.
Illustration of the average test accuracy (%) in each global round
on (a) Digit-5 and (b) Ofﬁce-10, respectively. The upper subﬁgure result is
reported under label non-IID with Dir(1.0), and the below is reported under
feature non-IID.
advantages of using multiprototype learning in handling het-
erogeneous tasks in FL, and we believe that multiprototype
learning based on architectures, such as transformers, will be
a promising research direction in the future. Moreover, it can
be expected that combining strategies aimed at accelerating
k-means calculation and other privacy-preserving techniques
with our strategy will further make contributions to the FL
community.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have introduced multiprototype learning
into the FL framework, and at the same time, a contrastive
learning strategy is applied to multiprototype learning to make
full use of multiprototype knowledge. First, a clustering-based
multiprototype calculation approach has been proposed. In
order to better leverage the knowledge from each client, we
then have proposed a contrastive learning strategy that encour-
ages clients to learn class-related knowledge from others in
each global round through multiprototype exchange, while
reducing the absorption of class-unrelated knowledge. Further,
we have introduced a multiprototype-based model inference
strategy into FL. This strategy also provides the potential for
fast model training in distributed edge networks, as only a
small amount of training is required when adding a new client,
to compare its prototype with the trained prototypes in the
global prototype pool for fast and correct predictions. Finally,
extensive experiments on four data sets demonstrate that our
proposal has a robust performance against label and feature
heterogeneity in terms of test accuracy and communication
efﬁciency. Compared to several baselines, our test accuracy
improves by about 4.6% and 10.4% under feature and label
non-IID, respectively.
APPENDIX
A. Convergence Analysis
We provide a convergence analysis for MP-FedCL. We add
a subscript to the local objective deﬁned in (2) indicating the
number of global iterations and give the following assumptions
following [5], [9], [19], and [43].
Assumption 1 (Convex, ζ-Lipschitz, and L1-Smooth): The
local loss objective Li(ω) is convex, ζ-Lipschitz, and L1-
smooth for each client i
∥Li

ωt1

−Li

ωt2

∥≤ζ∥ωt1 −ωt2∥
∥∇Li

ωt1

−∇Li

ωt2

∥≤L1∥ωt1 −ωt2∥
∀t1, t2 > 0, i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}.
(14)
Based on Assumption 1, the deﬁnition of Li(ω), and triangle
inequality, it is easy to prove that Li(ω) is convex, ζ-Lipschitz,
and L1-smooth.
Assumption 2 (δ-Local Dissimilarity): Each local loss func-
tion Li(ωt) is δ-local dissimilar at ωt, i.e.,
Ei∼Di

∥∇Li(ωt)∥2
≤∥∇L(ωt)∥2δ2
∀t > 0, i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}.
(15)
Ei∼Di[•] denotes the expectation over client i. ∇L(ωt) is the
global gradient at the tth global round, which can be deﬁned
as ∇L(ωt) = (1/Di) 
i∈Di ∇Li(ωt). This assumption is to
ensure the bounded similarity between the local model and
the global model, thus ensuring the convergence of the model.
Assumption 3 (Bounded Gradient): The expectation of the
stochastic gradient of each client i is bounded by G, i.e.,
E[∥∇Li(ωt; ξt)∥] ≤G
∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}.
(16)
Assumption 4 (Local Embedding L2-Lipschitz Continuous):
Each local embedding function is L2-Lipschitz continuous, that
is
∥fe,i

ωe,t1

−fe,i

ωe,t2

∥≤L2∥ωe,t1 −ωe,t2∥
∀t1, t2 > 0, i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}.
(17)
Assumptions from 1 to 3 are standard, and have been made
in different variants by previous works [5], [9], [19], [43].
Further, the similar assumption deﬁned in Assumption 4 can be
found in their works [19]. The main purpose of this assumption
is to control the changing rate of the local embedding function,
making it easier to study its behavior and properties.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 08,2025 at 12:56:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
